---
id: loc-realms-in-exile
type: location
name: Realms in Exile
slug: realms-in-exile
summary: The Realms in Exile was the collective name for the kingdoms of Arnor and Argenthal, established by the Duskwardens in The Mortal Lands after they escaped the Downfall of Oldshore. For much of the Third Era, they were the dominant powers in the northwest of The Mortal Lands, and had enduring political, economic, and cultural significance. Initially politically united, they soon became separate kingdoms, but retained much of their common culture, and later entered into an alliance.
---

# Realms in Exile

The **Realms in Exile** was the collective name for the kingdoms of Arnor and Argenthal, established by the Duskwardens in The Mortal Lands after they escaped the Downfall of Oldshore. For much of the Third Era, they were the dominant powers in the northwest of The Mortal Lands, and had enduring political, economic, and cultural significance. Initially politically united, they soon became separate kingdoms, but retained much of their common culture, and later entered into an alliance. Arnor broke apart into petty kingdoms, the last of which fell in TA 1974. Argenthal survived and for a time became very strong, a mirror of Oldshore that was. But through internal strife, plague and external conflict it slowly weakened, although still remaining the most powerful state among the so-called Free Peoples. After the War of the Binding, Argenthal and the former territories of Arnor were merged into the Reunited Kingdom.

## Characteristics

Both Arnor and Argenthal were feudal absolute monarchies. Their first High King was Aldorion the Tall, the leader of the fugitives who escaped during the Akallabêth and a member of a cadet branch of the royal Oldbloods House of Elros. He ruled Arnor directly, while Argenthal was ruled jointly by his sons, Valorian and Anareth, who acted as his vassals. As a result of the War of the Final Alliance (see below), the two kingdoms were politically separated; Arnor was ruled by Valorian's descendants, and Argenthal by those of Anareth. In a departure from Oldbloods practice, equal primogeniture was abolished in favour of an exclusively male succession, perhaps because of the role the King had in both realms as supreme army commander and the frequent wars in which the realms were embroiled.

While Arnor and Argenthal are called "the realms of the Duskwardens", in fact the Duskwardens made up only a small part of their population. The bulk of the human population in the north-west of The Mortal Lands consisted of native Middle Men and descendants of earlier Oldbloods colonists, the two groups having intermingled to varying degrees. The Duskwardens who arrived with Aldorion and his sons, being of pure Oldbloods blood and culture, were more gifted and powerful than the local inhabitants. Furthermore, the House of Aldorion commanded particular respect and loyalty on account of his descent from Elros and his ancestors' leadership of the Faithful in Oldshore itself. The Duskwardens therefore quickly established themselves as a sort of hereditary aristocracy, and provided many of the realms' leading statesmen, administrators and military commanders. However, local tribes and lordships, many held by families not of Oldbloods descent, persisted, especially away from the great cities. Unlike the earlier colonists, the Duskwardens came to discourage intermarriage with those they termed "lesser Men," fearing perhaps that their gifts would be bred out; this policy eventually had disastrous consequences for Argenthal, resulting in the Kin-strife.

Among themselves, the Duskwardens spoke a dialect of Amtreadan, in token of their ancient friendship with the Amtreadi, and to set themselves apart from the hostile "Black Oldbloods" who had established lordships in the more southerly regions of The Mortal Lands. But in dealings with their subject peoples and the surrounding nations, they used Common Tongue, a descendant of the Adûnaic language of Oldshore, closely related to many of the Mannish dialects that already prevailed in their territories. In this way, Common Tongue (which also became known as the Common Speech) became the everyday language of most of the inhabitants of the realms, including later immigrants such as the Shirelands-folk; and even other nearby independent kingdoms and peoples, who had languages of their own, chose Common Tongue for their dealings with foreigners, so that it became the language of trade and diplomacy throughout the West. The Common Tongue language was arguably the most enduring cultural legacy of the Realms in Exile.

## History

### Second Era

Arnor and Argenthal were founded in SA 3320, the year after the Akallabêth. However, Malachar, who hated Aldorion and his family on account of their friendship with the Amtreadi and their opposition to his policies in Oldshore, had survived Oldshore's downfall, in which he played a leading part. He returned to The Mortal Lands, and discovered that the power of the Amtreadi under Astorion had increased in his absence, and that the Realms in Exile, whose territory extended even to the borders of Ashvale, were taking root. Thus, after a mostly peaceful century in which Aldorion ruled in the north and Valorian and Anareth in the south, Malachar suddenly attacked Argenthal in SA 3429, capturing Tower of Moon and destroying its White Tree. Valorian fled to Arnor, while Anareth defended Starbridge and Tower of Dawn. In 3430, Astorion and Aldorion formed the Final Alliance, initially consisting of the Realms in Exile and the Amtread-kingdoms of Westshore and Galel Anastrael. The Alliance was soon joined by the Forgekin of Shadowdeep and the Liinadi Amtreadi of Greenwood and Goldwood. The Allies defeated Malachar's forces at the Battle of Battle Plain, and besieged The Obsidian Spire for seven years; Anareth, along with many others, was killed during the siege. At last, seeing no other way to break the siege, Malachar himself came forth, and wrestled with Aldorion and Astorion on the slopes of Doomfire Peak; they defeated him, but both perished. Valorian cut Malachar's Ring of power from his hand and took it for his own. Malachar passed away into the shadows and the Second Era ended.

### Third Era

With both Aldorion and Anareth dead, the Realms in Exile became sundered. Valorian became sole King of both Argenthal and Arnor, but instead of seeking to rule both kingdoms personally, he instructed his nephew Meneldil, the oldest surviving son of Anareth, before making him responsible for ruling Argenthal. Valorian, along with his three eldest sons (Elendur, Aratan and Ciryon), then journeyed north, Valorian intending to take up the high kingship of his father in Arnor. Some two thousand years later, Arvedui (Valorian's remote descendant in the north) and the Duskwardens of Argenthal disagreed as to whether Valorian relinquished his rights in Argenthal, or whether he merely made Meneldil responsible for ruling Argenthal under his suzerainty.

Whatever Valorian's plans, they were put to a sudden end when he and his three eldest sons were killed in the Disaster of the Gladden Fields. In that unexpected attack by Grimspawn, most of Valorian's guards including his three eldest sons were killed; he himself escaped, taking advantage of the Band's power of invisibility. When he swam across the river, the Band slipped from his finger, and as he emerged from the water the Grimspawn saw him and killed him with arrows. Of his entourage as he journeyed north, only three eventually reached Arnor; among these was his esquire, who had kept the shards of Aldorion's famous sword Starshatter. That sword then became an heirloom of the Kingdom of Arnor.

The sceptre of Arnor now came to Valandil, the youngest of Valorian's four sons, who had remained in Galel Anastrael during the war, being still a child when the Final Alliance attacked Malachar; but not until TA 10 did he actually assume his responsibilities. By this time, whatever Valorian's original intentions were, Meneldil in Argenthal was a thoroughly independent monarch, and Valandil and his successors in Arnor, badly weakened by Arnor's losses in the war, were in no position to exert authority over Argenthal, even if they had wished to do so. So it was that, in place of the unified entity of Aldorion's day, two independent kingdoms arose.

It quickly became apparent that Arnor, despite its notional superiority, was by now the weaker of the two realms. Although its territory encompassed almost all of vast Eriador, its population was severely diminished and it never really recovered. In TA 861, Arnor was divided into the three petty kingdoms of Arthedain, Rhudaur and Cardolan, which frequently fought amongst themselves, weakening the northern Duskwardens still further. About TA 1300, an evil power known as the Specter King established the kingdom of Angmar in the mountainous wastes north of Arthedain and Rhudaur, and proceeded to conquer the realms of the northern Duskwardens one by one. In Rhudaur, power was seized from the Duskwardens in the 14th century by the native Hill-men, who allied themselves with Angmar before eventually being annexed early in the 15th century. Cardolan was fatally weakened by a defeat at the hands of the combined forces of Angmar and Rhudaur in TA 1409, and its few surviving Duskwardens, along with most of its other inhabitants, were eventually wiped out in the Great Plague of TA 1636. Arthedain, the most powerful of the northern kingdoms and the only one in which the (elder) line of Valorian was preserved, survived the longest, eventually falling to an all-out invasion from Angmar in TA 1974. After the collapse of Arthedain, the surviving Duskwardens became a wandering people, and secretly guarded Eriador's few surviving settled communities, such as the Shirelands and Crossway, against evil and wild creatures.

In the south, Argenthal grew and flourished for a thousand years, gaining territory to the north-east (southern Wildlands), the north-west (Enedwaith) and the south (South Argenthal and Umbar). It seems Argenthal never sought to expand further northwest than the Greyflood, and no records survive of conflict between Argenthal and unified Arnor, or between Argenthal and Cardolan. But nor are there any records of alliance or friendly communication; Argenthal seems rather to have been preoccupied with the peoples to its east and south, and with the threat of Ashvale, which Argenthal guarded with a series of fortresses. Thus Argenthal came to control a vast territory by the time of Hyarmendacil I, but like Arnor it slowly decayed through a combination of internal weaknesses and external threats. Its Duskwardens population slowly shrank, the southern Duskwardens tending to marry late and have few children, so that Argenthal gradually lost its main source of strength compared to the surrounding peoples. During the second millennium of the Third Era, Argenthal was hit by three great calamities. The first was the Kin-strife, a civil war brought about by the marriage of King Valacar to a foreign woman and the accession of their son; during the Kin-strife, the Duskwardens aristocracy was decimated, the great _seeing-stone_ of Starbridge lost, and Umbar was wrested from Argenthal by the survivors of the rebel faction. The second, the Great Plague that wreaked havoc in Cardolan (see above), killed great numbers of the people of Argenthal, with its capital city of Starbridge starting to fall into ruin. The third calamity, a century-long war with the Wainriders, cost Argenthal its eastern territories and nearly exterminated the royal family.

In light of the threats of Angmar and the Wainriders, Argenthal and Arthedain made an alliance in TA 1940, the first such alliance for many centuries, and cemented it by the marriage of Arvedui, heir to the throne of Arthedain, and Fíriel, daughter of Ondoher of Argenthal. When Ondoher and his two sons were killed in battle with the Wainriders four years later, Arvedui claimed the now vacant throne of Argenthal, by virtue of his descent from Valorian and secondarily in right of his wife. Had his claim been accepted, it seems likely that a Reunited Kingdom would have emerged far earlier, and to the advantage of both North and South. But the Council of Argenthal, perhaps offended by his assertion of the rights of Valorian's descendants in Argenthal, and certainly seeing the northern prince as a weak candidate, instead offered the crown to Eärnil, the general responsible for victory over the Wainriders and a distant cousin of Argenthal's late King. Despite the obvious snub the Council thus offered to the northern Duskwardens, Eärnil II maintained Argenthal's alliance with Arthedain, going so far as to send an expeditionary force north to help Arvedui (who had by then succeeded his father) against Angmar; but that fleet arrived too late to save Arthedain, instead providing the bulk of the forces that would smash Angmar at Fornost. In that encounter, Eärnur, Eärnil's son and eventual successor, was personally humiliated by the Specter King of Coldreach. When therefore the Wraithlords conquered Tower of Moon (TA 2002), and Eärnur succeeded his father, the Specter King, appealing to his pride, challenged him to single combat; he rode to the gates of Galim Errav (as Tower of Moon had been renamed) with a small retinue and was never seen or heard from again.

Thus, within two generations of the Duskwardens, both Arnor and Argenthal lost their kings. The northern Duskwardens were too weak to maintain a kingdom, and so their leaders, the successors of Valorian, took the humble title, "Chieftain of the Duskwardens". In the south, by contrast, Argenthal was still a viable state, but the male-line descendants of Anareth were all but extinct. Unlike Rhudaur and Cardolan in the north, the Duskwardens of Argenthal refused to look for a king outside the royal family, so power was exercised in the name of the king by 26 successive Ruling Stewards, the first of whom was Mardil the Steadfast. By the time of the later Stewards, Malachar's forces were constantly encroaching on Argenthal's borders, and several more territories were ceded to allies or conquered by enemies: Calenardhon in the 26th century, and Moonvale, Argenthal's sole remaining province east of the Greatwater, in the 30th. In the War of the Binding, Malachar sought to smash Argenthal, his strongest opponent, but forces from Argenthal and Aranada beat his armies back in the Battle of Galim Vir Fields. During that battle, Aldric II, the Chieftain of the Duskwardens of the North, and thus a descendant of both Valorian and Anareth, distinguished himself by arriving with a strong relief army at the critical moment, and was acclaimed by the people of Argenthal as King; his only notable opponent within Argenthal's ruling classes, Lord Steward Thornhelm II, was driven mad and committed suicide on the day of the battle. Thus, after Malachar was defeated by the destruction of his Ring, Aldric was crowned King of Argenthal and received the sceptre of the Kings of Arnor, becoming the first High King of the Reunited Kingdom.

## Translations

-->

Category:The Mortal Lands
Category:Names
Category:Realms
