---
id: char-malachar
type: character
name: Malachar
slug: malachar
summary: "Malachar (High Amtreadan; or Vanyarin|), the eponymous Master of the Binding, was the greatest fallen Ascended, a former renowned disciple of Aulë, the chief agent of the first Shadow Lord Tenebros in the Elder Days (First Era), the second Shadow Lord, the maker of the Binding Band, and self-proclaimed ruler of the The Mortal Lands in the Second Era and near the end of the Third Era. In the Days before days, Malachar was corrupted by Tenebros (later named Tenebros) to betray the The Pantheon and serve him. He served as Tenebros's chief li"
properties:
  name: Malachar
  othernames: Mairon, Annavar,Gorthaur,the Dark Sorcerer,the One Enemy,See more
  title: Shadow Lord,Master of the Binding,Lord of the Earth,King of Men,See more
  birth: Before the Ainulindalë
  death: March 25, TA 3019, Battle of the Obsidian Gate (physical death only); Immortal
  realms: Dor-na-Daerachas (First Era),Ashvale & Dol Guldur (Second & Third Ages)
  weapon: Powers of the Ascended, the Binding Band, dark sorcery, mace, sword
  race: Firstborn (Ascended)
  culture: Ascended of Tenebros (initially of Aulë)
  gender: Male
  height: Variable until SA 3319(physical body), Of the Bands of Binding and the Third Era 9 feet 2.1 inches (\(2.78\) m) in the Master of the Binding films
  actor: Sala Baker (),Charlie Vickers (),Jack Lowden ( prologue)
  voice: Alan Howard&nbsp;(The Master of the Bands film trilogy),Benedict Cumberbatch&nbsp;(),Steve Blum&nbsp;( and ),Fred Tatasciore&nbsp;()
  realperson: "}"
relationships:
  -
    type: part_of
    target: loc-dor-na-daerachas-first-era
  -
    type: part_of
    target: loc-ashvale-dol-guldur-second-third-ages
  -
    type: member_of_race
    target: org-firstborn-ascended
  -
    type: member_of_culture
    target: org-ascended-of-tenebros-initially-of-aul
---

# Malachar

**Malachar** (High Amtreadan;  or Vanyarin|), the eponymous **Master of the Binding**, was the greatest fallen Ascended, a former renowned disciple of Aulë, the chief agent of the first Shadow Lord Tenebros in the Elder Days (First Era), the second Shadow Lord, the maker of the Binding Band, and self-proclaimed ruler of the The Mortal Lands in the Second Era and near the end of the Third Era. 

In the Days before days, Malachar was corrupted by Tenebros (later named Tenebros) to betray the The Pantheon and serve him. He served as Tenebros's chief lieutenant throughout the First Era. After Tenebros's ousting by the The Pantheon at the end of the First Era, Malachar went into hiding out of pride and shame. To the Liinadi of Westlands, Malachar was known as **Gorthaur** in the First Era.

Malachar returned to The Mortal Lands about 500 years into the Second Era, becoming the second Shadow Lord and plotting to conquer The Mortal Lands as his former master had. After deceiving the Amtreadi into making the Bands of Binding, Malachar deceitfully forged the Binding Band, which he intended to use to control all other Rings as part of his plot to bend the wills of everyone else to his. From then, he grew in power significantly.  

After acknowledging the might of the Oldbloods at the end of the Second Era, Malachar caused the Downfall of Oldshore, but was eventually defeated in the War of the Final Alliance of Amtreadi and Men united under Astorion and Aldorion. In the final battle, Valorian cut the Binding Band from Malachar's hand, destroying his corporeal form and robbing him of much of his power. Then, after centuries of lying dormant and regaining strength, Malachar returned openly to power late in the Third Era and again strove to dominate The Mortal Lands. Ultimately, however, the Binding Band was destroyed for good after being cast into the fires of Doomfire Peak, which not only cost him all his power, but also caused him to become a permanent shadow, who had no chance to take form or gain any power ever again.

## Biography
### Origin

Malachar's original name was **Mairon**. He was the mightiest Ascended of the Pantheon God Aulë the Smith, and learned much from Aulë of smithing and handiwork, becoming a great craftsman and "mighty in the lore of" Aulë's people. He was among the most powerful Ascended overall.

In the Days before days, Mairon was as Eru had created him: good and noble. His greatest virtue was his love of order and perfection, and dislike of anything wasteful. However, this would also prove to be the cause of his betrayal and downfall, as Mairon saw in Tenebros the will and power that would help him achieve his personal ends quicker than if he pursued them alone. However, while Tenebros wanted to either control or destroy The Mortal Lands itself, Mairon's desire was to dominate the minds and wills of its creatures for what he perceived to be their own benefit. To see his marvelous designs through, Mairon sought to increase his innate power, so he betrayed the The Pantheon and joined Tenebros, soon becoming his chief agent. 

After allying himself with Tenebros, Mairon feigned loyalty to the The Pantheon, which allowed him to secretly inform his master of his dealings with them. When Tenebros established his strongholds in The Mortal Lands, Mairon left The Blessed Realm and openly declared his allegiance, becoming a recognized foe of the The Pantheon.

### First Era

As Tenebros's lieutenant, Malachar commanded the fortress of Iron Fortress. It was with Malachar's aid that Tenebros was able to breed Grimspawn, in mockery of the Children of Ilúvatar. At the beginning of the Battle of the Powers, Malachar feigned a resistance against the The Pantheon at Iron Fortress, thus allowing Tenebros to muster forces at First Darkness unnoticed. After both Iron Fortress and First Darkness were sacked and Tenebros captured, Malachar was not found; in their haste to both capture the first Shadow Lord and remove him from The Mortal Lands, the The Pantheon overlooked Malachar's escape. Iron Fortress's reconstruction began, and the Grimspawn there multiplied under his command. The Liinadi Amtreadi in Westlands called him *Gorthaur*, meaning "dread abomination", while others of the Eldar had named him *Malachar*, meaning "the abhorred" or "the abominable" (a mockery of his original name). Under Malachar's regency, Iron Fortress was almost ready by YT 1495, Commanding "a host of Flamefiends" by one account, he seized the Amtreadan isle of Tol Sirion from its warden, Orodreth, and turned it into *Tol-in-Gaurhoth*, the Isle of werewolves. There he established himself as the Lord of werewolves, with both Draugluin, sire of the werewolves, and Thuringwethil, a Vampire herald, at his side. 

After the Battle of Sudden Flame in FA 456, Malachar was bidden by Tenebros to destroy Barahir, ally of Finoran, King of Deephold; Malachar ensnared Gorlim, who was captured by his hunters, and interrogated him about the outlaw-lord's location. Gorlim refused to tell them anything, even under torture, until Malachar himself came forth and bartered with the man. Gorlim asked for his wife Eilinel, whom he thought captured. Thus, Malachar agreed and Gorlim yielded the information. However, Tenebros's agent then revealed that Eilinel was dead, and he put Gorlim to death afterward. Malachar then sent Gorgol the Butcher's horde to slay Barahir and his company. Barahir's son, Beren, evaded this fate and after news of his deeds reached Tenebros. Malachar at the helm of an army of Grimspawn, werewolves and other fell beasts started hunting him.

In the Quest for the Starstone, Beren and Finoran were captured by Malachar when they tried to sneak past Tol-in-Gaurgoth in Grimspawn disguises. Malachar then defeated Finoran in a duel with songs of power, as told in The Lay of Leithian. Striping them of their stolen garb, he cast them into the dungeons where Werewolves devoured their companions; Tenebros's vassal hoped to terrify them into revealing their quest. When one of Malachar's werewolves came to attack Beren, Finoran wrestled with and killed it, but died soon after of his injuries.

Soon afterward, Luthiel and Huan the wolfhound arrived at the bridge of Tol-in-Gaurhoth. Malachar sent his servants to capture Luthiel, but all were slain by Huan, including Draugluin, but he fled and told his master that Huan was there. Malachar was aware of the prophecy that stated that Huan could not be slain save by the greatest wolf that had ever lived. As such, Malachar took the form of a werewolf and resolved to kill Huan and capture Luthiel. His form was so monstrous that as he charged down the bridge even Huan was forced to spring aside. But Luthiel possessed the ability to cast spells of sleep, and had one such spell active upon her when Malachar attacked. Malachar was momentarily impacted by the spell as he lunged at her, and Huan took advantage of this brief distraction to leap upon Malachar.

In the end Huan took Malachar by the throat and subdued him, and though Malachar attempted to shapeshift into a serpent and escape, Huan's grip upon his throat was too strong. Luthiel demanded then that Malachar yield to her the tower and the isle. She knew that Huan could not kill Malachar; as a Ascended he was immortal. But she knew as well that Malachar had built up a great deal of power in his corporeal form, and that if Huan destroyed it, that power would be lost. So she mocked him with the possibility of having to flee back to Iron Fortress, powerless and without a body, to endure the scorn of Tenebros. Ultimately, Malachar was not willing to endure such shame, and chose to surrender Tol-in-Gaurhoth to her rather than have his flesh destroyed. Huan released him and he fled in the form of a "vampire".

After his defeat by Luthiel, Malachar played little part in the events of the First Era (possibly hiding from Tenebros's scorn or wrath). After his former master was defeated and taken to The Blessed Realm in chains at the end of the First Era, Malachar approached the victorious Host of the West and pled with Eönwë for mercy. However, Eönwë did not have the authority to pardon a being of his own order, and commanded Malachar to return to The Far West to be judged by the The Pantheon. It is not known for certain whether Malachar was genuinely repentant, daunted by the Host's victory, or some combination of the two. Regardless however, Malachar's pride and fear ultimately won out and instead of returning to The Blessed Realm, he fled and hid in The Mortal Lands.

### Second Era
#### Forging of the Binding Band

After remaining hidden and dormant for five centuries, Malachar began revealing himself once more. At first his wishes were those of a reformer: he fancied that, with "the The Pantheon (including Tenebros) having failed", he would reorganize and heal The Mortal Lands. But his pride became boundless and his lust for absolute power, initially only the means to a noble end, became the end itself, leafing to him going back to his evil deeds. He desired to be a god-king and to be worshipped by all rational creatures. Malachar's hatred for the The Pantheon grew, regarding "the motives of Manwë as precisely the same as his own".   

By SA 1000, he had gathered power and established himself in the land of Ashvale, in eastern The Mortal Lands, and began building the dreaded The Obsidian Spire near Doomfire Peak. He gathered to his service all the Grimspawn "scattered far and wide in the Northern world" were under his dominion, as well as Stonelurks and other creatures from the days of Tenebros; Malachar also gained the allegiance of certain races of Men such as the Easterlings, "of old corrupted by Tenebros", and the Haradrim by promising them plunder, wealth and power.

Although Malachar knew that Men were easier to sway, he sought to bring the Amtreadi into his service, as they were far more powerful than any Men save the Oldbloods. By about SA 1500, Malachar deceptively put on a fair visage and called himself Annavar, the "Giver of Gifts". It is said that as Annavar he assumed the guise of an emissary of the The Pantheon, ironically "anticipating the Greycloaks".  The Amtreadi managed to hide the three greatest of the Rings from him, but the other sixteen Bands of Binding were either captured by Malachar, destroyed, or lost. To the Forgekin he had given Seven, but to Men he had given Nine, knowing that they would be the easiest to corrupt. 

Despite having given Rings to the greatest of the Forgekin rulers, whatever plans Malachar had devised for the Forgekin would not come to pass. For when Aulë had crafted the fathers of the Forgekin, he had made them exceedingly sturdy of both mind and body in order to resist the predations, both physical and spiritual, of Tenebros's dark servants. This proved to be exceedingly fortunate for the Forgekin, for the Forge-lords who received the Rings did not fade and could not be influenced by Malachar even while he wore the Binding Band. However, the Forgekin did not escape Malachar's maleficence unscathed, for the Rings kindled in the hearts of those who possessed them an insatiable lust for gold. Though this would make many of the Forgekin kingdoms exceedingly prosperous for a time, the obsession of the Forgekin ring-bearers with gold would ultimately bring much grief to their race. As Malachar predicted however, all nine of the Men to whom he had given Rings fell under his sway and became the Wraithlords, his deadliest servants.

Having grown "'greater', effectively" than Tenebros at the end, Malachar conquered nearly all of The Mortal Lands, with only Astorion's realm of Westshore being safe from his grasp. At his height during the Accursed Years, became known as the Shadow Lord to the Free Peoples. However, he had not expected the intervention of the Oldbloods, scions of the Edain (and partial descendants through Elros, of Beren and Luthiel). The armies of the King of Oldshore, Tar-Minastir, defeated Malachar's forces in the Battle of the Gwathló in SA 1700. Beaten but not wholly vanquished, Malachar fled back to Ashvale with only his bodyguard and began rebuilding his strength over the next centuries.

Towards the end of the Second Era, he was once again powerful enough to raise large armies to attempt to conquer The Mortal Lands. By this time, he assumed the titles of "Lord of the Earth" and "King of Men". He once again conquered nearly all of The Mortal Lands but his harassment of a number of Númenorian settlements along the western coasts brought him to the attention of Ar-Pharazôn, the most powerful King of Oldshore the world had yet seen. Insulted by Malachar's claim to both dominion of the world and the title of "King of Men", when Ar-Pharazôn considered himself to be the true bearer of that mantle, Ar-Pharazôn decided to challenge Malachar and force him to swear fealty.

#### Life in Oldshore
Ar-Pharazôn mustered an astounding Oldbloods army that utterly eclipsed even Malachar's own. In SA 3261, the King landed in Umbar in The Mortal Lands with his troops and began the trek to Ashvale. Malachar's armies were so overmatched that his forces fled from the Oldbloods as they approached Ashvale, and it became quite clear to Malachar that he could not best Ar-Pharazôn by force. Thus when Ar-Pharazôn sent messengers to The Obsidian Spire demanding that Malachar acknowledge the Oldbloods King's overlordship, Malachar descended from his fortress without any offer of battle and assumed a fair form. His appearance, mannerisms and flattery of the King confused and astonished the Oldbloods, for rumor of Malachar portrayed him to be anything but what he now presented. However, Ar-Pharazôn was not so entranced by Malachar's obsequiousness as his generals, and he demanded that Malachar come back to Oldshore as a hostage.

Malachar feigned unhappiness at this development but was secretly delighted, for this presented him with an opportunity to destroy the Oldbloods from within. After only a few short years in Oldshore he grew from captive to the King's most trusted adviser, and nearly all the King's court fawned upon him. Drawing on their fear of Death, he deceitfully converted many Oldbloods to the worship of Tenebros by lying that Tenebros had the power to save them from their mortality. As his power and influence reached its peak, he raised a great Temple for Tenebros in which he performed human sacrifices to the Shadow Lord. Finally, he manipulated and deceived Ar-Pharazôn to rebel against the The Pantheon and attack The Blessed Realm by lying that the one who claimed the Eternal Shore would be immortal. 

But here, Eru directly intervened—Oldshore was drowned under the sea, and the great navy of Oldshore was destroyed and the army that reached The Far West was buried under mountains of falling rock and said to be imprisoned in the Caves of the Forgotten. The world was bent, so that thereafter, only Amtreadi-ships could sail into the Utter West. Malachar's body was destroyed, but his spirit was not diminished, and he fled back to Ashvale bearing the Band, where he slowly rebuilt a new body and strength. Hereafter, he lost the ability to assume a fair shape, and ruled now through terror and force. A few Faithful Oldbloods led by Aldorion were saved from the flood, and they founded two Realms in Exile, Arnor and Argenthal, in The Mortal Lands. Ultimately, despite losing his ability to present himself as fair, Malachar had achieved an overwhelming victory in destroying Oldshore, which rid him of his most powerful opposition by far in ruling The Mortal Lands.

#### Loss of the Band
After learning that Aldorion, whom he had especially hated in Oldshore, had survived and was ordering a realm on his borders, Malachar made war on Arnor and Argenthal. However during his absence in Oldshore, Astorion, High King of the Ñoldor, had significantly increased the power of his own realm. In his haste to prevent Aldorion from strengthening his kingdoms, Malachar alerted Astorion to his return before his forces were fully prepared. Now aware of Malachar's resurgent threat, Astorion allied with Aldorion to create the Final Alliance of Amtreadi and Men, and together they marched across The Mortal Lands to attack Malachar. They defeated his armies in the Battle of Battle Plain, and then invaded Ashvale and laid siege to The Obsidian Spire for seven years. Finally, Malachar himself came forth and dueled with both Aldorion and Astorion and slew them, shattering the Shattered Blade Starshatter beneath him as he fell. However, Malachar was so badly wounded in turn that he was not able to stop Valorian, Aldorion's son, from cutting the Binding Band from his finger with one of Starshatter's shards. This destroyed Malachar's physical body, but his spirit endured and fled. Malachar's remaining forces were routed soon afterwards, and The Obsidian Spire was leveled to its foundations.

### Third Era

Despite this defeat, the Shadow Lord still was not fully vanquished. So long as the Band existed, Malachar's spirit would always have the ability to endure and take shape once more. For the first millennium of the Third Era he lay in hiding, slowly recovering strength until he regained enough power to direct his old servants, the Wraithlords and other evil creatures ("grimspawn and stonelurks [...] shadowwolves and werewolves"), against the Free Peoples.

#### The Dark Sorcerer of Dol Guldur

In TA 1000, Malachar became active once more, occupying the stronghold of Dol Guldur, the Hill of Sorcery, in southern Gloomwood in TA 1050, and working in secret. There, he used the guise of a dreaded sorcerer, called "the Dark Sorcerer", and the Amtreadi did not yet discern that he was the Shadow Lord returned. Around the same time, the The Pantheon sent five Ascended as the Order of Wizards,  to rally the Free Peoples of the World in countering his potential re-emergence. Though Malachar dismissed their presence "as a mere effort of defeated imperialists" (seemingly justified in the case of their chief, Morvain), Valdris arose among them as "the Shadow of Malachar".

While the Shadow Lord continued to scheme and gather strength, the Shadows reappeared in TA 1300, and began steadily assaulting the Oldbloods kingdoms in exile at his behest, ultimately destroying the North-kingdom of Arnor and gravely weakening the South-kingdom of Argenthal. In the same period, foul things that still walked the earth or beneath it were stirred: the Northern Grimspawn of the Misty Mountains grew bolder in their incursions, while secretly raising strongholds and barring the passes between Eriador and the Vales of Greatwater "according to the plan of their master in Dol Guldur"; the Dragons laid waste to the Forgekin mansions, consuming three of the Seven Forge-rings and claiming the treasure hoards. Guided by the emissaries of the Shadow Lord, the Easterlings and other wicked Men also renewed their bitter feud with the Solaarans and Northmen, launching fresh attacks on the western lands.

Suspecting that Malachar had indeed returned and that his hand coordinated the steady resurgence of evil, such as the actions of the Wraithlords, Valdris infiltrated Dol Guldur in TA 2063 to confirm his suspicion, but the Shadow Lord fled eastwards to conceal his identity. This marked the beginning of the Watchful Peace, which ended with Malachar's return to Dol Guldur in TA 2460 with renewed strength. In the same year, the Binding Band was finally discovered by the Stoor Slivven and his friend, Daglen. Slivven murdered Daglen and took the Band for himself. Slivven was eventually so changed by the Band's corruption he was given the name *Creepkin,* ostracized from his people, and dwelt secluded, deep within the Misty Mountains. With Grundin Folk driven out from Shadowdeep by The Deepflame, Malachar began "to people Shadowdeep with his creatures" around TA 2480; it is quite possible that the Flamefiend itself "had been awakened by the malice of Malachar".  

Following the sack of Ironpeak, Valdris felt that Malachar would take advantage of The Mortal Lands's weakened state: Arnor was no more, leaving Galel Anastrael and Goldwood open to an attack, and the Forgekin of the Iron Hills were the only obstacle in regaining Angmar. Above all else however, he feared that Malachar would eventually forge an alliance with the wyrm Scorath, whom the Shadow Lord could use to terrible effect. In TA 2850, Valdris entered Dol Guldur again and finally confirmed that the Dark Sorcerer was indeed Malachar himself. Eventually, the Grey Council put forth their strength and, with Morvain's approval, attacked Dol Guldur in TA 2941 in the hopes of ousting Malachar before he and Scorath could "help one another". The Wise were able to oust the weakened Malachar from Dol Guldur with relative ease, but Malachar had had ample time to prepare for their assault, and only feigned retreat, abandoning Dol Guldur willingly. He returned secretly to Ashvale, where he would openly declare himself in TA 2951, and began preparations for his final war to dominate The Mortal Lands. Having become the Wizard's "dark master",  Malachar then commanded Morvain to subjugate Aranada and form in Ironspire a second pincer to crush Argenthal. For the time being, Malachar tolerated the fact that Morvain was actually a faithless servant that coveted the Band, as he could "read his thought even when he withheld information."

After Creepkin was captured, Malachar had him tortured and learned that he once had a magic ring, and, from him, he heard the words *Shirelands* and *Burrows*. He deduced that Creepkin's ring was the Binding Band and released the creature in TA 3017, hoping that Creepkin would unwittingly lead him to *Burrows*. But Creepkin's trail was lost in the Bonefens, "where Malachar's emissaries. could not or would not follow him." The Shadow Lord then learned that the creature had been captured by his enemies. Malachar decided to send the dreaded Wraithlords, to find the *Shirelands* and search for *Burrows.* To conceal the Wraithlords's mission and test Thornhelm's strength, Malachar launched an assault against Starbridge in TA 3018. At the same time, his servants in Dol Guldur attacked Thornael's realm, where Creepkin was held, with orders to "to capture or kill Creepkin". The creature, however, escaped both the Shadow Lord and his enemies.

Their plot worked, as Malachar marshaled most of his remaining forces and marched them towards The Ashdeep to crush the Tyrran folk and regain his prize. This action left the Plains of Ashplain largely unguarded, allowing Tomlen and Sam to reach Doomfire Peak with far less difficulty than otherwise. However, once Tomlen reached the Chasm of Fire, he finally succumbed to the power of the Band, and put it on. Immediately, Malachar became aware of the shirefolk, and turned his gaze towards the mountain. He frantically sent the Wraithlords to retrieve the Band, but was too late, as Creepkin, after taking the Band from Tomlen, slipped and fell to his death into the Chasm of Fire. The Band was unmade. The earth shook as a great shock wave rippled across Ashvale, and the foundations of The Obsidian Spire were finally destroyed, causing the great fortress to fall into ruin once and for all. The cone of Doomfire Peak burst apart in a cataclysmic eruption that consumed the eight remaining Wraithlords.

With his source of power gone, Malachar was utterly defeated and his armies bereft of the driving will behind their conquest were swollowed up by the earth and destroyed. With the Binding Band destroyed, Malachar was permanently robbed of his physical form, reducing him to a malevolent spirit that hovered above Ashvale as a "huge shape of shadow, impenetrable, lightning-crowned, ...terrible but impotent," only to be blown away by a great wind; he had ended on the same path as his old master, Tenebros, and was condemned to a sleepless impotent malice that feeds on itself.

With the destruction of the Band, the vast majority of Malachar's being and his power was forever lost. With that, Malachar's spirit no longer had the power to create a new body and take shape again. Though his indestructible mind and being were bound forever to Eä, Malachar had lost all power to effect his will upon the world and could never again grow in strength.

## Etymology
The name ***Malachar*** is High Amtreadan, meaning "the Abhorred".

His original name was ***Mairon*** ("the Admirable", from *maira* meaning "admirable, excellent"), a name he used while in Oldshore, adding the title "Tar" for "Tar-Mairon" ("Excellent king"). The Oldbloods themselves gave him the name **Zigúr**, meaning *"Sorcerer"* in Adûnaic. When disguising himself in the Second Era, he called himself **Annavar** ("Giver of Gifts"; *anna* = gift and *tar* = king, lord), **Artano** ("High-smith"), and **Aulendil** ("Friend of Aulë").

His name is sometimes seen written as **Thauron **(**Þauron**), an earlier pronunciation of *Malachar*.

### Titles & epithets
- The **Shadow Lord** (also **Shadow Lord of Ashvale** or **Second Shadow Lord**)
- The **Dark Power**
- The **Deceiver)
- The **Sorcerer**
- The **Dark Sorcerer**
- The **Nameless** (also **Nameless One** or **Nameless Enemy**)
- The **Unnamed**
- The **Shadow****
- The **Master of the Binding** (also **Lord of the Band** or **Ring-lord**)
- The **Giver of Gifts**
- The **Lord of The Obsidian Spire** ( also **Lord of the Obsidian Spire**)
- The **Lord of Ashvale** (also **Lord of the Black Land**)
- The **Lord of the Earth**)
-  The **Ruler**)
***God-King**
- The **King of Men**
- The **King** (also **King of Kings**

## Character
Despite being the title character of , Malachar never directly appears in the events of the trilogy. Nowhere is description given, in detail, of what he looks like.

In the time of , however, Malachar was a shape-shifter, taking in one instance the forms of a serpent, a vampire, and a great wolf. After Tenebros's fall, Malachar appeared in fair form as "Annavar", the Giver of Gifts, and maintained this appearance until the fall of Oldshore, in which he was unable to ever take a fair form ever again.  includes a passage vaguely describing how the Oldbloods saw him: "Upon that ship which was cast highest and stood dry upon a hill there was a man, but greater than any even of the race of Oldshore in stature...And it seemed to men that Malachar was great; though they feared the light of his eyes.

"To many he appeared fair, to others terrible; but to some evil." A few clues are given as to Malachar's appearance as the Shadow Lord, after he lost his ability to take a fair form: the chronicler described him in one of his letters as having the form of "a man of more than human stature, but not gigantic, and as an image of malice and hatred made visible". He apparently gave off great heat, such that Astorion was burned to death by his touch, and Valorian would describe Malachar's hand as "black, yet burning like fire".

Creepkin, having apparently once seen Malachar directly, described him as having only four fingers on his black hand, suggesting that Malachar was unable to regenerate the finger from which Valorian took the Binding Band, similarly to how the wounds Tenebros took from Fingalor never healed.

In addition to his physical appearance, Malachar also apparently had an aura of incredible malevolence. A passage in *The Starstone Tales* describes him as having a "dreadful presence" and daunting eyes.  Malachar's primary, present-day appearance in the rest of Jackson's  is as the Watcher of Malachar, a titanic, flaming eye atop The Obsidian Spire. The feline appearance of this "astral" form is perhaps a reference to the forerunner of his character in the first drafts, namely "Tevildo", a fay who took the form of a great cat.  When Malachar speaks, it is telepathically through the Binding Band or a *seeing-stone*; when he is voiced by Alan Howard. Sala Baker portrays his physical form.

Malachar was originally intended to appear as Annavar and in his physical form at the climax of *The Return of the King*, appearing at the Battle of the Obsidian Gate to fight Aldric. However, this was ultimately scrapped from the film due to the fact it was not in the book and the developers believed it would take the main focus away from the Shirefolk protagonists. Furthermore, Jackson believed it would take away from Aldric's act of sacrifice.

Some of his background from *The Starstone Tales* (including his former position as Tenebros's chief agent, his defeat in the Battle of the Gwathló and role in the Downfall of Oldshore) is mentioned in the film tie-in . Concept art and a deleted scene showed that the flashbacks would have seen Malachar killing Astorion in the War of the Final Alliance.

In the Prologue of , the Shadow Lord is shown forging the Binding Band, seeking to dominate all life. From Ashvale, Malachar's armies begins spreading across The Mortal Lands, enslaving the Free Peoples. In answer to his tyranny, Aldorion and Astorion form the Final Alliance of Amtreadi and Men and march against Malachar. As the Siege of The Obsidian Spire nears it end and defeat for the Grimspawn seems imminent, the Shadow Lord himself appears and breaks through the Ñoldor and Oldbloods ranks with his mace. After slaying Aldorion with a swing of his weapon, Malachar breaks his sword, Starshatter. He would have killed Aldorion's son, Valorian, with his hot touch, but Valorian uses the shards of Starshatter to cut the Binding Band off from Malachar's hand, causing Malachar's form to disintegrate.

Though his body was undone, the spirit of the Shadow Lord endured. As he slowly recovered his spent strength, he began stirring his servants: the Lord of the Wraithlords established himself as the Specter King of Coldreach, from where he destroyed Arnor before being driven out by the Amtreadan realms of Galel Anastrael and the Mistport; the Easterlings, Haradrim and Corsairs were incited into several wars against Argenthal; the Grimspawn of the Misty Mountains multiplied, occupied Shadowdeep and began blocking the ways between Eriador and the Greatwater Vales. When he felt ready, Malachar reclaimed Ashvale and began rebuilding The Obsidian Spire. Through the *seeing-stone*, Malachar compelled Morvain into his service with promises of power; the Shadow Lord was aware of his puppet's intention to usurp his place, but kept the White Wizard as "an instrument to be wielded and ultimately discarded".  With the Amtreadi leaving The Mortal Lands for the Eternal Shore, the main obstacles in his way are the realms of Men. Malachar's strategy is to attack from both sides: on the eastern front he sends the Wraithlords led by the Specter King against Argenthal, and on the western front Morvain to crush Aranada. According to the Shadow Lord's strategy, the attacks by his chief agents will keep the two kingdoms from helping one another. To further weaken the resistance, Malachar used his *seeing-stone* to drive Thornhelm, Steward of Argenthal, into madness and despair. for his part, Azrak was more concerned with exacting vengeance on Durgan Ironbark rather than his master's plans. Malachar's growing power stirs awake most fell things: giant Spiders of The Webmother's bloodline (through Venomweave) breed under his dominion in Dol Guldur and start spreading throughout southern Gloomwood;  Stonelurks descend from the Ettenmoors upon the settlements of Men; Shadowdeep Grimspawn, Shadowwolves and other war beasts gather in the cess pits of Dol Guldur. With Malachar's blessing, Azrak begins hunting Durgan and his Company, in order to stop them from reaching Ironpeak and slaying their secret ally, Scorath. All these ill omens trouble Valdris, who begins to fear that the ancient Enemy has returned. 

In , the effects of Malachar's presence in Gloomwood, from the sickness of the forest to the giant Spiders that now lurk there, rouse the suspicions of Thornwick. Following two of The Webmother's spawn to their nest, the Brown Wizard begins to investigate the ruins of Dol Guldur before he is ambushed by the resurrected Specter King of Coldreach. Thornwick averted the attack and seized the spectre's dagger, a Morgul blade. As he picked up the blade, the Brown Wizard sees the Dark Sorcerer emerging from the shadows and immediately leaves, barely escaping with his life from the Bats which reside in the fort, and setting out to find Valdris.

Valdris himself sees the obvious signs of Malachar's return: three Stonelurks have left the Ettenmoors to raid a farm on the outskirts of Staddle; Gundabad Grimspawn led by Yazneg (in Azrak's name) are pursuing Durgan and Company. At the meeting of the Grey Council in Galel Anastrael, the Grey Wanderer tries to point out to his peers that the last of the Seven Forge-rings has mysteriously "vanished" and that if Scorath should side with Malachar, he "could be used to terrible effect". Though Valdris's proposition to investigate Dol Guldur and aid the Quest of Ironpeak was overruled by Morvain, Aelindra believed Valdris that "something moves in the shadows unseen" and that "every day it grows in strength" and so urged him to press on and confirm the identity of the Dark Sorcerer. 

Malachar's power drew the Binding Band out of its hiding with Creepkin under the Misty Mountains. It intentionally fell out of Creepkin's pocket in order to be acquired by a Goblin imp who fell into his cavern, but Creepkin killed the Goblin. Jasper Burrows, a Shirefolk and a member of Durgan's Company, was captured by the Goblins and fell with the imp, ending up taking the Band, which he managed to keep a secret of all but Creepkin (whom he evades) and Valdris.

In the , Valdris's meddling in the Quest of Ironpeak forces Malachar to show his hand early. Now preparing to make his war, Malachar sends Bolgrak to summon Azrak to Dol Guldur. Dismissing his servant's insolence and petty vendetta with Ironbark, the Shadow Lord grants him command of his armies; Azrak nonetheless sends his son, Bolgrak, to hunt Durgan in his stead. The gathering of Shadowdeep Grimspawn at Dol Guldur has not gone unnoticed by Bjorn, who warns Valdris that foul things in the Dark Sorcerer's service have infested the Greatwater Vales. As Durgan's Company enters Gloomwood, Valdris sees the Red Eye (being Malachar's banner) on an Amtreadi statue, a sign of defilement and of the Shadow's return. Compelled to go investigate the Wraithlords' tombs in the High Fells of Rhudaur, the Grey Wanderer finds them open. Conferring with Thornwick, Valdris confirms that the Dark Sorcerer cannot be mere human, and that given the Shadows answer only to one master, the presence in Dol Guldur is none other than Malachar himself.

Valdris sets for Dol Guldur, and asks Thornwick to summon Aelindra. He discovers Thragol as a prisoner in Dol Guldur, who also reveals the alliance between Malachar and Scorath. Fleeing from Azrak, Valdris and Thragol are confronted by Malachar himself. The Grey Wanderer is unable to save the old Forgekin's life, but fends the Shadow Lord off before he is fully revealed in his true form and identity. Malachar effortlessly reduces Valdris's staff to ashes and defeats him. He has also perhaps informed Scorath of the Durgan and Company's approach, but when Bolgrak tracks the Forgekin to Lake-town he sends messengers to inform Malachar that Durgan had already left for Ironpeak. In turn, Malachar unleashes Azrak's army, to march upon the Ironpeak.

In , Malachar kept Valdris imprisoned, hoping to draw out the keepers of the other two Bands of Binding kept by the Amtreadi. He retrieves the Morgul blade from him and sends the Keeper of the Dungeons to harvest the Band Band of Fire from the captive Wizard. His Grimspawn minion is easily crushed when Aelindra arrives to rescue Valdris. However, as she and an her unconscious ally leave, they are surrounded by the Shadows. Seemingly cornered by the Wraithlords,  Thalion and Morvain prove to be not far behind, and aid her in battle as Thornwick enters and helps to get Valdris out. After the Shadows are defeated, the Shadow Lord himself appears, and summons anew all the Shadows, proclaiming a new Age under his dominion. But Aelindra reveals herself in wrath, banishing the Wraithlords and confronting the "servant of Tenebros". After a contest of wills, the Shadow Lord chooses to flee into the East. Thalion suggests that Malachar will likely return to Ashvale, and tells Morvain to warn Argenthal to reset their watch on the black land. The White Wizard reassures him that without the Binding Band, the Shadow Lord will not be able to hold dominion over the land. Morvain then tells Thalion to take Aelindra back to Goldwood and "leave Malachar to [him]", paving the final steps of Morvain's downfall. 

Meanwhile, Azrak's army sent by Malachar (and reinforced by Bolgrak's army from Gundabad) arrives at the Ironpeak but is held back by armies of Lake-men and the Woodland Realm (which have gathered there to besiege Durgan in Ironpeak for the sake of earning remunerations from his hoard) and of the Iron Hills (sent to Durgan's aid). Azrak risks the course of the battle to draw Durgan out, and is defeated by the Forgekin. Sylvorn slays Bolgrak, while the reinforcing Grimspawn from Gundabad are defeated by the Skywardens and Bjorn, summoned by Thornwick.

### In *The Master of the Bands: The Bands of Binding*

In , Malachar is the main antagonist. He desires to become the new Shadow Lord and conquer the world, no longer by fighting, but by taking power through the flesh, dominating the minds of other races. His adversary is Adar, who has already tried to kill him and wants to free the grimspawn, his children, from Malachar's domination.

During the First Era, he was Tenebros's loyal lieutenant. He participates in the War of the Jewels and kills Finoran, Aelindra's older brother, leaving a strange mark on the amtreadi's body. Aelindra vows to pursue him for revenge and to rid The Mortal Lands of Tenebros's last lieutenant. Exploring the north of Forodwaith, she discovers the famous mark in an abandoned grimspawn citadel.  At first glance, this mark has no meaning, but the Amtreadi later discovers that it is a map of the Southlands intended for the Shadow Servant, to tell them where to go in case of defeat. 

At the beginning of the Second Era in Dúrnost, Malachar, seconded by Adar, summoned the grimspawn. After Tenebros's defeat, he wants to become their new lord and conquer the world through the domination of the spirits of other races. The grimspawn, who have suffered greatly from Tenebros's wars, do not want him. One of them even tries to stab him. Adar lifts the Shadow Lord's Crown to place it on his master's head, but turns it over at the last moment and plants it in Malachar's back. The grimspawn then rush to the Ascended and stab him many times. While Adar checks to see if his enemy is dead, he opens his eyes and emits an intense light. A huge explosion takes place and the Forodwaith is covered in ice. Malachar's body is gone, only his clothes remain.
Malachar's blood flows in the caverns beneath the citadel and forms a pond. It contains a black and stringy form that will feed on rats and insects to grow. Having enough strength, he manages to leave the mountain and, crawling in the snow, reaches the territory of the Men. There, he devours a traveler and finally has enough energy to transform into Halbrand. He leaves for the Southlands and meets refugees who are fleeing the grimspawn, including Diarmid, to cross the Sea and seek peace. This bears the coat of arms of the Kings of the Southern Lands, which comes from his family formerly in the service of kings. Halbrand decides to follow them. Their ship is destroyed by the Giant Sea Worms. Halbrand steals the pendant with the coat of arms from Diarmid who is trapped under a beam, just before the boat sinks. With a few survivors on a raft, they take in Aelindra who is swimming in the sea. 

Here, Malachar takes on the identity of "**Halbrand**" some time after being struck down by Adar, who had become disillusioned with Malachar's cruelty towards the race of Grimspawn. He carried an insignia bearing the mark of the King of the Southlands that he claimed to have taken from a dead man, perhaps the last king himself. 

Posing as a simple man fleeing from Grimspawn attacks, he eventually comes to be on a raft in the Sundering Seas, with Abigail, Eamon, and others. It is here that he encounters the Amtreadi Aelindra, who was swimming eastward to The Mortal Lands, shortly before "the worm" that had destroyed their ship returns and assails them. Malachar stays afloat by separating a section of raft from the others, who perish, and brings Aelindra on board, though he withholds his own story. In a storm that rolls in soon afterwards, Aelindra is dragged under by a weighted line, but Malachar dives in and rescues her. Exhausted by the strain, the two drift until found by a Oldbloods ship commanded by Aldorion.

Aldorion brings them back to Oldshore's capital of Armenelos and presents them to Queen-regent Míriel. Aelindra demands passage back to The Mortal Lands and nearly causes hostilities before Malachar intervenes and brokers an agreement for time to be taken before a decision. Malachar afterwards cautions Aelindra against causing any more disturbances. He soon causes his own disturbance, however, by provoking the guildsman Tamar and several of his friends by attempting to steal Tamar's guild badge, which Malachar desires to be able to gain working access to a blacksmith's shop. Tamar begins to physically attack Malachar, but is taken aback when Malachar retaliates, violently taking out Tamar and his fellows and leaving them seriously injured. Malachar allows himself to be arrested and thrown into prison for his actions.

Aelindra soon visits him in prison and chastises him for his deeds, though she also reveals a document recovered from Oldshore's Hall of Lore, which identifies the insignia he wears as the symbol of the rightful ruler of the Southlands. Malachar states he found the insignia on a dead man, though Aelindra still believes him to be the rightful ruler. Eventually, after Aelindra succeeds in persuading Míriel to send an army to the Southlands to oppose Adar, Malachar is released from captivity and starts working as a blacksmith. Aelindra finally convinces Malachar to join the Oldbloods expedition to The Mortal Lands after retelling her battles and losses.

Upon reaching The Mortal Lands and sailing up the Greatwater to the margins of the Southlands, the Oldbloods cavalry ride across the Shadow Mountains to Tirharad, where its inhabitants are heavily beleaguered by Adar's troops. Though the Oldbloods make quick work of the Grimspawn, Adar flees on horseback carrying what is believed to be the Grimspawn Sigil Hilt forged by Tenebros, that Adar had been seeking. Aelindra and Malachar pursue Adar through the nearby forest, until Malachar dismounts him and would have killed him, seeking revenge, before being stopped by Aelindra. After Aelindra questions Adar after putting him in shackles, "Halbrand" is introduced by Míriel to the villagers of Tirharad as the rightful king of the Southlands. The people gladly accept him, but shortly after are shocked when Doomfire Peak suddenly erupts. In the ensuing chaos, Malachar receives a serious wound to his abdomen, and is brought to the Oldbloods' camp with the other Southlander refugees. Upon Aelindra's return, she determines his wound requires Amtreadan healing, and though he declares his intent to stay and fight for the Southlands, he accompanies Aelindra on horseback to Eregion.

In Ost-in-Edhil, he soon recovers from his injury and while looking for Aelindra he discovers Celebranor's forge, wherein he meets the Master-smith himself and learns of the truesilver fragment. He suggests the idea of an alloy to amplify the effects of the precious metal, and soon gains Celebranor's trust. Aelindra, however, is suspicious, after hearing Celebranor repeat phrases associated with the Shadow Lord. After uncovering a document showing the line of Southland kings had been broken a thousand years before, Aelindra confronted Malachar, who effortlessly blocked her dagger attacks then entered her mind and so attempted to sway her to his side through a vision by claiming he desired to heal The Mortal Lands. She rejected his offer, and Malachar fled Eregion before the other Amtreadi learnt of his identity. Aelindra did not tell Celebranor so that he would continue in forging the Three Bands, though Thalion discovered the truth on his own, from the document she had discovered. Malachar, meanwhile, through unknown means, had returned to the newly-named land of Ashvale.

In Ashvale, Adar prepares for war against Malachar and forces the Southern men to swear allegiance to him. Halbrand has allowed himself to be captured and is brought before him. He negotiates the freedom of his people in exchange for information about Malachar that would help the amtreadi forge a new weapon. Adar threw him in jail and had him tortured. Halbrand, locked up with a Shadowwolf, manages to overpower him and will use him to kill his torturer, Waldreg. Adar finally agrees to release Halbrand and send him to the amtreadi to find more information about Malachar. Before letting him go, he asks Halbrand to lie down at his feet and swear loyalty to him. He swears loyalty to the Lord of Ashvale, then sets off on horseback for Eregion. 

Astorion, in Westshore, has learned from Aelindra that Halbrand is Malachar. He sends an urgent letter to Celebranor informing him of this news. The messenger is killed on the way and never arrives. Halbrand arrives at Ost-in-Edhil and asks to see Celebranor. The latter has promised Aelindra not to speak to the king of the Southlands again and leaves him at the door. 

Celebranor finally goes to Halbrand and orders him to leave. Halbrand manipulates him. He makes him believe that he has seen Aelindra, that the Rings have saved the Great Tree and the Amtreadi, but that Astorion has not even bothered to warn the master blacksmith. Finally, Celebranor brings him in. Halbrand asks him to make Rings for Men, but when Celebranor refuses, he tells him that he is in fact sent from the The Pantheon to counter the Shadow. Halbrand suddenly disappears and then reappears in the fire in the form of Annavar. By further flattering Celebranor's ego, calling him the Master of the Binding, Celebranor will finally agree to forge rings for Forgekin and Men.

Aelindra, thanks to Band of Water, has a vision and understands that Malachar wants to forge more Bands of Binding. She obtained permission to leave for the Eregion with difficulty, but under Thalion's orders. Halbrand has already entered his mind once and the High King and his Herald are afraid that he will be able to do it again. 

Grundin and Disa are received by Celebranor and Annavar, who offer to forge Bands of Binding to heal the mountains of the forgekin, who have suffered from earthquakes, in exchange for Truesilver. The offer was made to them rather than to the king, because the blacksmith knew that he did not like outside help. Grundin is skeptical, suspicious of the Rings, and he doesn't like Annavar. Disa finally convinced him that any solution must be tried to save Shadowdeep who had no more food.

Annavar tricks Celebranor into believing that Astorion has forbidden the making of any more Rings, and flatters the Blacksmith's vanity. The latter takes the bait. He writes to his king that he is closing the great forge, but is going to make the Rings for the Forgekin and the Men. It is the ultimate goal of his life, his masterpiece.

Grundin III, having no solution for his kingdom, accepts the offer and brings the Truesilver to forge the Seven Bands. He gives it to Celebranor, but Annavar takes it from him and holds it in his clenched fist before adding it to the molten metal and starting to forge the new rings. 

Celebranor celebrates with Narvi the creation of Grundin's Gates in Ost-in-Edhil. Annavar looks troubled. He argues with the blacksmith, he suffers for the men and asks for Rings for them. Celebranor doesn't want to, men are too easily corruptible, and even helped Adar. Annavar tells him about the great men of the First Era, assuring him that they can find good and noble men in the realms of The Mortal Lands or Oldshore. Celebranor says no, Annavar accepts him, he will forge the Rings without him.

In the forge of Ost-in-Edhil, there is suddenly panic, the tools fly in the air. Celebranor comes running. Annavar explains to him that he made a ring with more Truesilver, to limit the risk of corruption in men, and that when Mirdania tried it on to check the size, she disappeared. He would like the master blacksmith to help him not to make any mistakes. Following a flying hammer, Celebranor grabs his apprentice and removes the ring. Grundin IV arrives just at this moment and wants to see the lord of the place. He informs the blacksmith of his father's strange behavior since he has the ring, he has become greedy and irritable, forgetting his past caution. Celebranor explains that they used the same process as for the Amtreadi Rings, which work very well. Grundin suggests that the problem may be with Annavar.

Meanwhile, Annavar goes to talk to the young amtreadi who is recovering from her emotions. He tells her about this Invisible World that she saw when she put on the ring, where beings reveal their true form. He makes her believe that the dark and terrifying creature with ageless and merciless eyes that she saw there is Celebranor who is weakened by the creation of the rings and less resistant to the forces of evil. She believes him and promises not to mention her master's weakness to anyone, not even with him.

Celebranor returns to see Annavar, to find out if anything happened during the creation of the Rings of the Forgekin. Annavar replies that he didn't do anything himself, but that they created the Rings with their minds polluted by Celebranor's lying letter, telling the High King that he will not forge new rings. Celebranor does not want to denounce himself to Astorion, whose wrath he fears. Celebranor decides to forge the Shadows Bands of Men, to balance those of the forgekin. They have to be perfect and even threaten these assistants with expulsion if they make the slightest mistake. Annavar reassures them afterwards, explaining that the blacksmith is overwhelmed by the importance of the Rings. 

Celebranor, cannot forge the Rings of Men, and they have no Truesilver left. He is very irritable, and forgets the name of his assistant. Annavar then shows up with a request from citizens who want to speak to their lord. Celebranor confides in him that he is tired and confused, but that the Rings come first. Annavar takes charge of the administration of the city and the supply of Truesilver.

When Commander Malendol informs him that he has sent soldiers on the road and that only one has returned, but he has died. His body is mutilated with Runes engraved on it. Mirdania, who is present, asks if Celebranor should be informed. Annavar assures him that he must not be disturbed, even his blacksmith assistants must not go to see him. You have to bury the body and not talk about it.

He then went to Shadowdeep, for the MIthril. He offered timber for the mines or other wealth in exchange. Grundin III refused. Annavar bows and sees the shape of a Flamefiend in a torch before withdrawing. He finally gets some from Narvi.

At Ost-in-Edhil, the enemies were finally seen and the alarm sounded. There is panic in the city. Annavar cuts his hand with a knife and goes up to see Celebranor. The latter, who is working on The Rings of Men, wonders the nature of the noise he hears outside. Annavar tries to hold him back, even threating him with disgrace for abanonding his work to "save" the world from Malachar, but the blacksmith wants to get off and see what happens. Malachar then casts a spell and when Celebranor comes out of the tower, he sees the city by day where everything seems idyllic. Annavar hands him the hammer of Faenor, he explains that the Bands of Binding will be his life's work and that they will eclipse the Starstones in the memory of the amtreadi. He gives him the little Truesilver he has obtained. Celebranor climbs back into his tower to continue his work, for a final try. As soon as the blacksmith disappears, the reality of the panicked night city returns. Annavar smiles at the chaos to come.
During the battle, he takes command of the defense and asserts himself as the Lord of Eregion, claiming that Celebranor has gone mad and is refusing to be disturbed. Annavar orders the army to enact a plan, but is surprised when the river is blocked by the grimspawn shooting a cliff to fall into it with their siege engines.  Annavar, through the chaos and killing, keeps the illusion going to make Celebranor think it is fine to keep working. Eventually, Celebranor confronts him, recognizing that he is being trapped in an illusion- to which Annavar responds by revealing his identity as Malachar to a horrified Celebranor. He then takes Celebranor escaping and ordering his arrest as a means to frame Celebranor for the murder of his chief assistant Mirdania, which he uses magic to push off the city walls into a horde of Grimspawn. Celebranor is eventually chained up, but cuts off his own thumb to break free and escapes briefly with the Shadows Bands for Men; after giving these rings to Aelindra, he returns to distract Malachar, who tortures him at length.  

While at the Forge, Malachar continues torturing Celebranor to discover the location of the rings, but this is to no avail due to Celebranor's strength and will. After insulting Malachar and hinting at his ruin, Malachar murders Celebranor in an act of rage- just before Glug and a company of Grimspawn enter the forge. To the surprise of Glug, Malachar speaks kindly and is persuasive, getting Glug and his company of Grimspawn to submit to him and agree to betray Adar. Malachar, through unknown means (perhaps his powers), goes in secret with an "injured" Glug and his company, who go to Adar- and reveal their new allegiance by stabbing Adar to death in the same fashion Adar tried to kill him; Glug and the other Grimspawn now take orders from Malachar, who sends them to kill all the Amtreadi in Eregion but take their leaders captive. 

After killing Adar, Malachar duels with Aelindra and takes both the Shadows Bands and Tenebros's Crown, but to his anger, she refuses to be his queen again and chooses to fall off a cliff rather than give him her Amtreadi ring. Later, when Glug reports to him that the Amtreadi retreat is being supported by reinforcements sent from Khazad-Dum, and that pursuit will cause many Grimspawn to die, Malachar takes out his anger and sadistically murders Glug by plunging Adar's sword through his throat. The Grimspawn, now terrified of Malachar killing them, hopelessly return to battle where many of them are slain. Malachar is later shown standing nearby Glug's body, holding Celebranor's hammer.

### In video games
- In , Annavar is depicted in a mural in the ruins of 'Tham Mírdain'. He was called 'Antheron' ("Gift Lord"), because Turbine does not have the rights to the name "Annavar". In the session play quest 'Daughter of Strife' from Volume I: Book XV, where the player takes on the character of Narmaleth, Malachar is also encountered in his disguise of Annavar (Antheron), at the time he taught the Amtreadi of Eregion the secrets of the Rings. Visiting Malachar's personal chambers in Dol Guldur leads to a vision of the Shadow Lord, still weak and recovering from his defeat at the hand of Valorian. During an extended flashback sequence to the War of the Final Alliance, Malachar himself is met within The Obsidian Spire by the player, who controls a historic character.
- In the strategy game , Malachar is one of the 'Ring Heroes', the other being Aelindra, which can be summoned when a player successfully finds Creepkin and takes the Binding Band by killing him. He can only be summoned by the evil factions Ashvale, Ironspire, and Goblins. Malachar is likely the strongest unit in the game, as he has immense health and can instantly kill most infantry and cavalry units with his mace. More powerful units, such as Stonelurks and Treewardens, are still no match for him in small amounts, being easily neutralized in a few blows. Malachar is also able to summon fiery rocks from the skies and demoralise enemy units, causing them to run around in panic. When Malachar is killed, he explodes violently, heavily damaging any enemy units in the vicinity. Upon his death, he drops the Binding Band, which may then be picked up again.
-  In the 2014  video game, Malachar appears before Celebranor as Annavar (or the rights equivalent), the Giver of Gifts, and deceives him into creating the Bands of Binding. After the secret forging of the Binding Band, Annavar takes Celebranor to Ashvale to perfect the Binding Band. Celebranor later escapes Ashvale with the Band and uses its power to challenge Malachar in battle. At the last moment, the Band slips from Celebranor's finger. As vengeance, Malachar captures Celebranor, transforms back into Annavar and proceeds to torture and kill Celebranor's captive family in front of him, and then Celebranor himself. These events are expanded upon in a DLC campaign, where Malachar acts as the final boss. In the main campaign, Malachar sends his minions to seize The Ashdeep and the Obsidian Gate, massacring the Solaaran Wardens stationed there. His minions conduct a dark ritual intended to bring back the wraith of Celebranor so he can forge Malachar a New Band of Binding while the Binding Band remains missing, killing the player character Talion and his family. However while it initially seems a failure, it had succeeded in binding the spirit of Celebranor to Talion, banishing him from death, being deemed by his enemies as the Gravewalker. Towards the end of the campaign, one of Malachar's agents, the Hand of Malachar, becomes host to Malachar's new physical body and Malachar acts as the Final Boss, temporarily defeated. 
- In the 2017 sequel to the above, , Malachar largely remains a distant force until the climax of the game. Talion and Celebranor styling themselves as the 'Bright Lord' lead their host of dominated Grimspawn to confront Malachar at the still under-construction The Obsidian Spire. However Talion and Celebranor's alliance is severed when they defeat a wraithlord revealed to be the Solaaran King Valorian. Celebranor takes their 'New Band of Binding', and grants it to the amtreadi Eltariel, believing she would act more ruthlessly and efficiently. Finishing the march to The Obsidian Spire, they ends up fighting Malachar despite still being weakened by the loss of the Binding Band. Malachar use both his armored form, and his Giftbringer forms during the encounter. Despite putting up a good fight, he is overwhelmed by Celebranor and his new host Eltariel who plan on dominating him with the power of their own New Ring. Before succumbing, he cuts off Eltariel's ring finger like Valorian had done to him years earlier, and consumes Celebranor's wraith. While he survives, this forces him into a new form; a 'Flaming Eye' at the top of The Obsidian Spire, locked in a battle of wills with the Amtreadi for decades. While Malachar and the Bright Lord are occupied, Talion having used the 'Band of Binding' belonging to the Wraithlord Valorian once again sets to conquering Ashvale with a new army of dominated Grimspawn, in a set of decades long 'Shadow Wars'. While he succeeds he is ultimately corrupted by Saurons influence, banishing Celebranor from Malachar, now once again robbed of his physical body. The final resolution only comes when the Binding Band is destroyed decades later during *The Return of the King*. It is also revealed that Celebranor and his family were killed by Malachar using Túrann, the Truesilver forge hammer, once gifted to Celebranor by Annavar.
-  Malachar appears in both  and ; in the first he is a boss and playable character while he is featured as a playable character in the latter. His boss form appears as a massive CCBS figure-similar to something from LEGO's *Knights Kingdom* line, while as a playable character he appears as a mini-figure. In *The Shirefolk* game he appears in both Dark Sorcerer and fiery armored forms. The first game also features an Annavar mini-figure as a downloadable character.
- Malachar's mini-figure form, voiced by Steven Blum, also appears in *LEGO Dimensions*, where he invades the DC Comics' dimension, taking over Metropolis with the aid of the Rift Keystone. Soon thereafter, Malachar uses the Rift Keystone to bring The Obsidian Spire across dimensions to stand atop Lexcorp tower. When Batman, Valdris, and Wildstyle arrive in the city to retake the Keystone, Malachar engages the three in a battle atop a *Doctor Who* Dalek saucer. Eventually, he is defeated, being pulled through a rift by Lord Vortech, the primary antagonist. Malachar is turned into a cube and does not appear again.
- In , Malachar is a playable character.
- Malachar appears in the introduction sequences of  and its sequel, ''J.R.R. the chronicler's The Master of the Bands, Vol. II: The Two Towers*.
- A parody of Malachar, "Serum", appears in the adventure game *Bored of the Rings*.
- A parody of Malachar along his minions which it was a sporks in *Veggietales* special *The Lord of the Beans*.

### In other media
Malachar also appears or is referenced in a number of works that are not direct adaptations of *The Master of the Bands* or its associated mythos:   

- Malachar of Marvel Comics adopted the name in homage to the the chronicler character.
- Malachar served as the inspiration for the *My Little Pony: Friendship is Magic* antagonist King Sombra in his initial appearance.
- In *The LEGO Batman Movie'', Malachar-in his flaming eye from atop his tower-is among the villains recruited by The Joker to aid in his conquest of Gotham City. His powers of vision prove quite a nuisance to Batman and his companions, but he is eventually inadvertently destroyed by the Kraken's mouth projectile. He is voiced by actor Jemaine Clement.
- In *The Master of the Bands*-based *Minecraft* mod, Malachar was an unimplemented mob in the mod.

## Trivia
- He is one of only three characters to appear in all six films of both *The Shirefolk* and *The Master of the Bands* trilogies, the other two being Valdris and Aelindra.
**As Halbrand in , Malachar's pupils once briefly take on the same shape as his "Great Eye" form in .

## Gallery

## Appearances
### Books
-  (Only mentioned as "the Dark Sorcerer")

### Films
-  (As the "Dark Sorcerer")
-  (As the "Dark Sorcerer" and as himself)

**The LEGO Batman Movie* (voice only)

### TV shows

### Video games

-  and its expansion 

**LEGO Dimensions*
**Iron Fortress*

## Translations
-->

## References

Category:Bearers of the Binding Band
Category:Canon characters in The Bands of Binding
Category:Characters in The History of The Mortal Lands
Category:Characters in Unfinished Tales
Category:The Shirefolk: The Battle of Five Hosts characters
Category:The Shirefolk: An Unexpected Journey characters
Category:The Shirefolk: The Desolation of Scorath characters
Category:The Master of the Bands characters
Category:The Company of the Band (film) characters
Category:The Two Towers (film) characters
Category:The Return of the King (film) characters
Category:Ascended
Category:Major characters (The Master of the Bands)
Category:High Amtreadan names & words
Category:Ring bearers
Category:Servants of Tenebros
Category:The Starstone Tales characters
Category:Villains

ca:Sàuron
de:Malachar
es:Malachar
fr:Malachar
he:סאורון
it:Malachar
nl:Malachar
pl:Malachar
pt-br:Malachar
ru:Саурон
tr:Malachar
sk:Malachar