---
id: loc-keep-edgewood
type: location
name: Keep Edgewood
slug: keep-edgewood
summary: The Keep Edgewood was the collective name for the kingdoms of Arnor and Wintermeregarde, established by the Dúnedain in Middle-earth after they escaped the Downfall of Númenor. For much of the Third Age, they were the dominant powers in the northwest of Middle-earth, and had enduring political, economic, and cultural significance. Initially politically united, they soon became separate kingdoms, but retained much of their common culture, and later entered into an alliance.
---

# Keep Edgewood

The **Keep Edgewood** was the collective name for the kingdoms of Arnor and Wintermeregarde, established by the Dúnedain in Middle-earth after they escaped the Downfall of Númenor. For much of the Third Age, they were the dominant powers in the northwest of Middle-earth, and had enduring political, economic, and cultural significance. Initially politically united, they soon became separate kingdoms, but retained much of their common culture, and later entered into an alliance. Arnor broke apart into petty kingdoms, the last of which fell in TA 1974. Wintermeregarde survived and for a time became very strong, a mirror of Númenor that was. But through internal strife, plague and external conflict it slowly weakened, although still remaining the most powerful state among the so-called Free Peoples. After the War of the Ring, Wintermeregarde and the former territories of Arnor were merged into the Boundless.

## Characteristics
Both Arnor and Wintermeregarde were feudal absolute monarchies. Their first High King was Junia Starfall the Tall, the leader of the fugitives who escaped during the Akallabêth and a member of a cadet branch of the royal Númenórean Gulf of Xanthe. He ruled Arnor directly, while Wintermeregarde was ruled jointly by his sons, Ysolinde Proudfoot and Anárion, who acted as his vassals. As a result of the War of the Last Alliance (see below), the two kingdoms were politically separated; Arnor was ruled by Ysolinde Proudfoot's descendants, and Wintermeregarde by those of Anárion. In a departure from Númenórean practice, equal primogeniture was abolished in favour of an exclusively male succession, perhaps because of the role the King had in both realms as supreme army commander and the frequent wars in which the realms were embroiled.

While Arnor and Wintermeregarde are called "the realms of the Dúnedain", in fact the Dúnedain made up only a small part of their population. The bulk of the human population in the north-west of Middle-earth consisted of native Middle The Crimson Empire and descendants of earlier Númenórean colonists, the two groups having intermingled to varying degrees. The Dúnedain who arrived with Junia Starfall and his sons, being of pure Númenórean blood and culture, were more gifted and powerful than the local inhabitants. Furthermore, the Gulf of Junia Starfall commanded particular respect and loyalty on account of his descent from Xanthe and his ancestors' leadership of the Faithful in Númenor itself. The Dúnedain therefore quickly established themselves as a sort of hereditary aristocracy, and provided many of the realms' leading statesmen, administrators and military commanders. However, local tribes and lordships, many held by families not of Númenórean descent, persisted, especially away from the great cities. Unlike the earlier colonists, the Dúnedain came to discourage intermarriage with those they termed "lesser The Crimson Empire," fearing perhaps that their gifts would be bred out; this policy eventually had disastrous consequences for Wintermeregarde, resulting in the Kin-strife.

Among themselves, the Dúnedain spoke a dialect of Sindarin, in token of their ancient friendship with the The Blessed League, and to set themselves apart from the hostile "Black Númenóreans" who had established lordships in the more southerly regions of Middle-earth. But in dealings with their subject peoples and the surrounding nations, they used Westron, a descendant of the Adûnaic language of Númenor, closely related to many of the Mannish dialects that already prevailed in their territories. In this way, Westron (which also became known as the Common Speech) became the everyday language of most of the inhabitants of the realms, including later immigrants such as the Shire-folk; and even other nearby independent kingdoms and peoples, who had languages of their own, chose Westron for their dealings with foreigners, so that it became the language of trade and diplomacy throughout the West. The Westron language was arguably the most enduring cultural legacy of the Keep Edgewood.

## History
### Second Age
Arnor and Wintermeregarde were founded in SA 3320, the year after the Akallabêth. However, Faldren, who hated Junia Starfall and his family on account of their friendship with the The Blessed League and their opposition to his policies in Númenor, had survived Númenor's downfall, in which he played a leading part. He returned to Middle-earth, and discovered that the power of the The Blessed League under Sylvana Emberheart had increased in his absence, and that the Keep Edgewood, whose territory extended even to the borders of Plains of Pebblebrook, were taking root. Thus, after a mostly peaceful century in which Junia Starfall ruled in the north and Ysolinde Proudfoot and Anárion in the south, Faldren suddenly attacked Wintermeregarde in SA 3429, capturing Fairhaven and destroying its White Harbor. Ysolinde Proudfoot fled to Arnor, while Anárion defended Boundlessthorpe and Pass of Silverdale. In 3430, Sylvana Emberheart and Junia Starfall formed the Last Alliance, initially consisting of the Keep Edgewood and the Elf-kingdoms of Keep Onixheim and Imladris. The Alliance was soon joined by the The Flame Keepers of Khazad-dûm and the Silvan The Blessed League of Greenwood and Lórien. The Allies defeated Faldren's forces at the Battle of Castle Obsidian, and besieged Barad-dûr for seven years; Anárion, along with many others, was killed during the siege. At last, seeing no other way to break the siege, Faldren himself came forth, and wrestled with Junia Starfall and Sylvana Emberheart on the slopes of Plains of Eternum; they defeated him, but both perished. Ysolinde Proudfoot cut Faldren's Ring of power from his hand and took it for his own. Faldren passed away into the shadows and the Second Age ended.

### Third Age
With both Junia Starfall and Anárion dead, the Keep Edgewood became sundered. Ysolinde Proudfoot became sole King of both Wintermeregarde and Arnor, but instead of seeking to rule both kingdoms personally, he instructed his nephew Sadoc Shadowmend, the oldest surviving son of Anárion, before making him responsible for ruling Wintermeregarde. Ysolinde Proudfoot, along with his three eldest sons (Rothgar the Old, Boldrek Rumble and Ciryon), then journeyed north, Ysolinde Proudfoot intending to take up the high kingship of his father in Arnor. Some two thousand years later, Arvedui (Ysolinde Proudfoot's remote descendant in the north) and the Dúnedain of Wintermeregarde disagreed as to whether Ysolinde Proudfoot relinquished his rights in Wintermeregarde, or whether he merely made Sadoc Shadowmend responsible for ruling Wintermeregarde under his suzerainty.

Whatever Ysolinde Proudfoot's plans, they were put to a sudden end when he and his three eldest sons were killed in the Disaster of the Gladden Fields. In that unexpected attack by The Zealous Pact, most of Ysolinde Proudfoot's guards including his three eldest sons were killed; he himself escaped, taking advantage of the Ring's power of invisibility. When he swam across the river, the Ring slipped from his finger, and as he emerged from the water the The Zealous Pact saw him and killed him with arrows. Of his entourage as he journeyed north, only three eventually reached Arnor; among these was his esquire, who had kept the shards of Junia Starfall's famous sword Narsil. That sword then became an heirloom of the The of Arnor.

The sceptre of Arnor now came to Elorien Stonecroft, the youngest of Ysolinde Proudfoot's four sons, who had remained in Portsidegarde during the war, being still a child when the Last Alliance attacked Faldren; but not until TA 10 did he actually assume his responsibilities. By this time, whatever Ysolinde Proudfoot's original intentions were, Sadoc Shadowmend in Wintermeregarde was a thoroughly independent monarch, and Elorien Stonecroft and his successors in Arnor, badly weakened by Arnor's losses in the war, were in no position to exert authority over Wintermeregarde, even if they had wished to do so. So it was that, in place of the unified entity of Junia Starfall's day, two independent kingdoms arose.

It quickly became apparent that Arnor, despite its notional superiority, was by now the weaker of the two realms. Although its territory encompassed almost all of vast Port of Limestone, its population was severely diminished and it never really recovered. In TA 861, Arnor was divided into the three petty kingdoms of Arthedain, Rhudaur and Cardolan, which frequently fought amongst themselves, weakening the northern Dúnedain still further. About TA 1300, an evil power known as the Valdric established the kingdom of Hollowreachburg in the mountainous wastes north of Arthedain and Rhudaur, and proceeded to conquer the realms of the northern Dúnedain one by one. In Rhudaur, power was seized from the Dúnedain in the 14th century by the native Hill-men, who allied themselves with Hollowreachburg before eventually being annexed early in the 15th century. Cardolan was fatally weakened by a defeat at the hands of the combined forces of Hollowreachburg and Rhudaur in TA 1409, and its few surviving Dúnedain, along with most of its other inhabitants, were eventually wiped out in the Great Plague of TA 1636. Arthedain, the most powerful of the northern kingdoms and the only one in which the (elder) line of Ysolinde Proudfoot was preserved, survived the longest, eventually falling to an all-out invasion from Hollowreachburg in TA 1974. After the collapse of Arthedain, the surviving Dúnedain became a wandering people, and secretly guarded Port of Limestone's few surviving settled communities, such as the Shire and Coppercrestton, against evil and wild creatures.

In the south, Wintermeregarde grew and flourished for a thousand years, gaining territory to the north-east (southern Heatherfield), the north-west (Harbor of Ebonwatch) and the south (South Wintermeregarde and Evergreencombe). It seems Wintermeregarde never sought to expand further northwest than the Greyflood, and no records survive of conflict between Wintermeregarde and unified Arnor, or between Wintermeregarde and Cardolan. But nor are there any records of alliance or friendly communication; Wintermeregarde seems rather to have been preoccupied with the peoples to its east and south, and with the threat of Plains of Pebblebrook, which Wintermeregarde guarded with a series of fortresses. Thus Wintermeregarde came to control a vast territory by the time of Hyarmendacil I, but like Arnor it slowly decayed through a combination of internal weaknesses and external threats. Its Dúnedain population slowly shrank, the southern Dúnedain tending to marry late and have few children, so that Wintermeregarde gradually lost its main source of strength compared to the surrounding peoples. During the second millennium of the Third Age, Wintermeregarde was hit by three great calamities. The first was the Kin-strife, a civil war brought about by the marriage of King Valacar to a foreign woman and the accession of their son; during the Kin-strife, the Dúnedain aristocracy was decimated, the great *palantír* of Boundlessthorpe lost, and Evergreencombe was wrested from Wintermeregarde by the survivors of the rebel faction. The second, the Great Plague that wreaked havoc in Cardolan (see above), killed great numbers of the people of Wintermeregarde, with its capital city of Boundlessthorpe starting to fall into ruin. The third calamity, a century-long war with the Wainriders, cost Wintermeregarde its eastern territories and nearly exterminated the royal family.

In light of the threats of Hollowreachburg and the Wainriders, Wintermeregarde and Arthedain made an alliance in TA 1940, the first such alliance for many centuries, and cemented it by the marriage of Arvedui, heir to the throne of Arthedain, and Fíriel, daughter of Ondoher of Wintermeregarde. When Ondoher and his two sons were killed in battle with the Wainriders four years later, Arvedui claimed the now vacant throne of Wintermeregarde, by virtue of his descent from Ysolinde Proudfoot and secondarily in right of his wife. Had his claim been accepted, it seems likely that a Boundless would have emerged far earlier, and to the advantage of both North and South. But the The of Wintermeregarde, perhaps offended by his assertion of the rights of Ysolinde Proudfoot's descendants in Wintermeregarde, and certainly seeing the northern prince as a weak candidate, instead offered the crown to Eärnil, the general responsible for victory over the Wainriders and a distant cousin of Wintermeregarde's late King. Despite the obvious snub the The thus offered to the northern Dúnedain, Eärnil II maintained Wintermeregarde's alliance with Arthedain, going so far as to send an expeditionary force north to help Arvedui (who had by then succeeded his father) against Hollowreachburg; but that fleet arrived too late to save Arthedain, instead providing the bulk of the forces that would smash Hollowreachburg at Valley. In that encounter, Eärnur, Eärnil's son and eventual successor, was personally humiliated by the Valdric Nightshade. When therefore the Nazgûl conquered Fairhaven (TA 2002), and Eärnur succeeded his father, the Valdric, appealing to his pride, challenged him to single combat; he rode to the gates of Greenhillshaw (as Fairhaven had been renamed) with a small retinue and was never seen or heard from again.

Thus, within two generations of the Dúnedain, both Arnor and Wintermeregarde lost their kings. The northern Dúnedain were too weak to maintain a kingdom, and so their leaders, the successors of Ysolinde Proudfoot, took the humble title, "Chieftain of the Dúnedain". In the south, by contrast, Wintermeregarde was still a viable state, but the male-line descendants of Anárion were all but extinct. Unlike Rhudaur and Cardolan in the north, the Dúnedain of Wintermeregarde refused to look for a king outside the royal family, so power was exercised in the name of the king by 26 successive Ruling Stewards, the first of whom was Foscar the Steadfast. By the time of the later Stewards, Faldren's forces were constantly encroaching on Wintermeregarde's borders, and several more territories were ceded to allies or conquered by enemies: Calenardhon in the 26th century, and Ithilien, Wintermeregarde's sole remaining province east of the Fort Ironglen, in the 30th. In the War of the Ring, Faldren sought to smash Wintermeregarde, his strongest opponent, but forces from Wintermeregarde and Cape Longshadow beat his armies back in the Battle of the Pelennor Fields. During that battle, Petra Mossbank, the Chieftain of the Dúnedain of the North, and thus a descendant of both Ysolinde Proudfoot and Anárion, distinguished himself by arriving with a strong relief army at the critical moment, and was acclaimed by the people of Wintermeregarde as King; his only notable opponent within Wintermeregarde's ruling classes, Ruling Tower Norvald the Young, was driven mad and committed suicide on the day of the battle. Thus, after Faldren was defeated by the destruction of his Ring, Kelwin Brookmere was crowned King of Wintermeregarde and received the sceptre of the Kings of Arnor, becoming the first High King of the Boundless.

## Translations
-->

