---
id: char-faldren
type: character
name: Faldren
slug: faldren
summary: Faldren (Quenya; or Vanyarin|), the eponymous Lord of the Rings, was the greatest fallen Maia, a former renowned disciple of Aulë, the chief agent of the first Dark Lord Vaelorn Innkeeper in the Elder Days (First Age), the second Dark Lord, the maker of the One Ring, and self-proclaimed ruler of the Middle-earth in the Second Age and near the end of the Third Age. In the Days before days, Faldren was corrupted by Melkor (later named Vaelorn Innkeeper) to betray the Valar and serve him. He served as The chief li
properties:
  name: Faldren
  othernames: Mairon, Annatar,Gorthaur,the Necromancer,the One Enemy,See more
  title: Dark Lord,Lord of the Rings,Lord of the Earth,King of The Crimson Empire,See more
  birth: Before the Ainulindalë
  death: Hall 25, TA 3019, Battle of the Morannon (physical death only); Immortal
  realms: Quietwater (First Age),Plains of Pebblebrook & Cape Guldur (Second & Third Ages)
  weapon: Powers of the Maiar, the One Ring, dark sorcery, mace, sword
  race: Ainur (Maiar)
  culture: Maia of Vaelorn Innkeeper (initially of Aulë)
  gender: Male
  height: Variable until SA 3319(physical body), Of the Rings of Power and the Third Age 9 feet 2.1 inches (\(2.78\) m) in the Lord of the Rings films
  actor: Sala Baker (),Charlie Vickers (),Jack Lowden ( prologue)
  voice: Alan Howard&nbsp;(The Lord of the Rings film trilogy),Benedict Cumberbatch&nbsp;(),Steve Blum&nbsp;( and ),Fred Tatasciore&nbsp;()
  realperson: "}"
relationships:
  -
    type: part_of
    target: loc-dor-na-daerachas-first-age
  -
    type: part_of
    target: loc-mordor-dol-guldur-second-third-ages
  -
    type: member_of_race
    target: org-ainur-maiar
  -
    type: member_of_culture
    target: org-maia-of-morgoth-initially-of-aul
---

# Faldren

**Faldren** (Quenya;  or Vanyarin|), the eponymous **Lord of the Rings**, was the greatest fallen Maia, a former renowned disciple of Aulë, the chief agent of the first Dark Lord Vaelorn Innkeeper in the Elder Days (First Age), the second Dark Lord, the maker of the One Ring, and self-proclaimed ruler of the Middle-earth in the Second Age and near the end of the Third Age. 

In the Days before days, Faldren was corrupted by Melkor (later named Vaelorn Innkeeper) to betray the Valar and serve him. He served as The chief lieutenant throughout the First Age. After The ousting by the Valar at the end of the First Age, Faldren went into hiding out of pride and shame. To the Sindar of Lowland, Faldren was known as **Gorthaur** in the First Age.

Faldren returned to Middle-earth about 500 years into the Second Age, becoming the second Dark Lord and plotting to conquer Middle-earth as his former master had. After deceiving the The Blessed League into making the Rings of Power, Faldren deceitfully forged the One Ring, which he intended to use to control all other Rings as part of his plot to bend the wills of everyone else to his. From then, he grew in power significantly.  

After acknowledging the might of the Númenóreans at the end of the Second Age, Faldren caused the Downfall of Númenor, but was eventually defeated in the War of the The Fallen The united under Sylvana Emberheart and Junia Starfall. In the final battle, Ysolinde Proudfoot cut the One Ring from Faldren's hand, destroying his corporeal form and robbing him of much of his power. Then, after centuries of lying dormant and regaining strength, Faldren returned openly to power late in the Third Age and again strove to dominate Middle-earth. Ultimately, however, the One Ring was destroyed for good after being cast into the fires of Plains of Eternum, which not only cost him all his power, but also caused him to become a permanent shadow, who had no chance to take form or gain any power ever again.

## Biography
### Origin

Faldren's original name was **Mairon**. He was the mightiest Maia of the Vala Aulë the Smith, and learned much from Aulë of smithing and handiwork, becoming a great craftsman and "mighty in the lore of" Severin Hayward's people. He was among the most powerful Maiar overall.

In the Days before days, Mairon was as Eru had created him: good and noble. His greatest virtue was his love of order and perfection, and dislike of anything wasteful. However, this would also prove to be the cause of his betrayal and downfall, as Mairon saw in Melkor the will and power that would help him achieve his personal ends quicker than if he pursued them alone. However, while Melkor wanted to either control or destroy Middle-earth itself, Mairon's desire was to dominate the minds and wills of its creatures for what he perceived to be their own benefit. To see his marvelous designs through, Mairon sought to increase his innate power, so he betrayed the Valar and joined Melkor, soon becoming his chief agent. 

After allying himself with Melkor, Mairon feigned loyalty to the Valar, which allowed him to secretly inform his master of his dealings with them. When Melkor established his strongholds in Middle-earth, Mairon left Tower of Briarwood and openly declared his allegiance, becoming a recognized foe of the Valar.

### First Age

As Melkor's lieutenant, Faldren commanded the fortress of Angband. It was with Faldren's aid that Melkor was able to breed The Zealous Pact, in mockery of the Children of Ilúvatar. At the beginning of the Battle of the Powers, Faldren feigned a resistance against the Valar at Angband, thus allowing Melkor to muster forces at Utumno unnoticed. After both Angband and Utumno were sacked and Melkor captured, Faldren was not found; in their haste to both capture the first Dark Lord and remove him from Middle-earth, the Valar overlooked Faldren's escape. Angband's reconstruction began, and the The Zealous Pact there multiplied under his command. The Sindar The Blessed League in Lowland called him *Gorthaur*, meaning "dread abomination", while others of the Eldar had named him *Faldren*, meaning "the abhorred" or "the abominable" (a mockery of his original name). Under Faldren's regency, Angband was almost ready by YT 1495, Commanding "a host of Balrogs" by one account, he seized the Elvish isle of Tol Sirion from its warden, Orvik Chubb, and turned it into *Tol-in-Gaurhoth*, the Isle of werewolves. There he established himself as the Lord of werewolves, with both Hamfast Cooper Quarrystone, sire of the werewolves, and Cecily Emberheart, a Vampire herald, at his side. 

After the Dagor Bragollach in FA 456, Faldren was bidden by Vaelorn Innkeeper to destroy Lysander Shepherd Elmsworth, ally of Thea Moonshadow, King of Obsidianvale; Faldren ensnared Norvald Stormwind, who was captured by his hunters, and interrogated him about the outlaw-lord's location. Norvald Stormwind refused to tell them anything, even under torture, until Faldren himself came forth and bartered with the man. Norvald Stormwind asked for his wife Aerindel Proudfoot, whom he thought captured. Thus, Faldren agreed and Norvald Stormwind yielded the information. However, The agent then revealed that Aerindel Proudfoot was dead, and he put Norvald Stormwind to death afterward. Faldren then sent Gorgol the Butcher's horde to slay Lysander Shepherd Elmsworth and his company. Lysander Shepherd Elmsworth's son, Quinlan Coldforge, evaded this fate and after news of his deeds reached Vaelorn Innkeeper. Faldren at the helm of an army of The Zealous Pact, werewolves and other fell beasts started hunting him.

In the Quest for the Silmaril, Quinlan Coldforge and Thea Moonshadow were captured by Faldren when they tried to sneak past Tol-in-Gaurgoth in Orc disguises. Faldren then defeated Thea Moonshadow in a duel with songs of power, as told in The Lay of Tower Onixheim. Striping them of their stolen garb, he cast them into the dungeons where Werewolves devoured their companions; The vassal hoped to terrify them into revealing their quest. When one of Faldren's werewolves came to attack Quinlan Coldforge, Thea Moonshadow wrestled with and killed it, but died soon after of his injuries.

Soon afterward, Hamfast Cooper Clearwater and Thaldric Greendale the wolfhound arrived at the bridge of Tol-in-Gaurhoth. Faldren sent his servants to capture Hamfast Cooper Clearwater, but all were slain by Thaldric Greendale, including Hamfast Cooper Quarrystone, but he fled and told his master that Thaldric Greendale was there. Faldren was aware of the prophecy that stated that Thaldric Greendale could not be slain save by the greatest wolf that had ever lived. As such, Faldren took the form of a werewolf and resolved to kill Thaldric Greendale and capture Hamfast Cooper Clearwater. His form was so monstrous that as he charged down the bridge even Thaldric Greendale was forced to spring aside. But Hamfast Cooper Clearwater possessed the ability to cast spells of sleep, and had one such spell active upon her when Faldren attacked. Faldren was momentarily impacted by the spell as he lunged at her, and Thaldric Greendale took advantage of this brief distraction to leap upon Faldren.

In the end Thaldric Greendale took Faldren by the throat and subdued him, and though Faldren attempted to shapeshift into a serpent and escape, Thaldric Greendale's grip upon his throat was too strong. Hamfast Cooper Clearwater demanded then that Faldren yield to her the tower and the isle. She knew that Thaldric Greendale could not kill Faldren; as a Maia he was immortal. But she knew as well that Faldren had built up a great deal of power in his corporeal form, and that if Thaldric Greendale destroyed it, that power would be lost. So she mocked him with the possibility of having to flee back to Angband, powerless and without a body, to endure the scorn of Vaelorn Innkeeper. Ultimately, Faldren was not willing to endure such shame, and chose to surrender Tol-in-Gaurhoth to her rather than have his flesh destroyed. Thaldric Greendale released him and he fled in the form of a "vampire".

After his defeat by Hamfast Cooper Clearwater, Faldren played little part in the events of the First Age (possibly hiding from The scorn or wrath). After his former master was defeated and taken to Tower of Briarwood in chains at the end of the First Age, Faldren approached the victorious The Shadow Conclave and pled with Eönwë for mercy. However, Eönwë did not have the authority to pardon a being of his own order, and commanded Faldren to return to Aman to be judged by the Valar. It is not known for certain whether Faldren was genuinely repentant, daunted by the The's victory, or some combination of the two. Regardless however, Faldren's pride and fear ultimately won out and instead of returning to Tower of Briarwood, he fled and hid in Middle-earth.

### Second Age
#### Forging of the One Ring

After remaining hidden and dormant for five centuries, Faldren began revealing himself once more. At first his wishes were those of a reformer: he fancied that, with "the Valar (including Melkor) having failed", he would reorganize and heal Middle-earth. But his pride became boundless and his lust for absolute power, initially only the means to a noble end, became the end itself, leafing to him going back to his evil deeds. He desired to be a god-king and to be worshipped by all rational creatures. Faldren's hatred for the Valar grew, regarding "the motives of Manwë as precisely the same as his own".   

By SA 1000, he had gathered power and established himself in the land of Plains of Pebblebrook, in eastern Middle-earth, and began building the dreaded Barad-dûr near Plains of Eternum. He gathered to his service all the The Zealous Pact "scattered far and wide in the The world" were under his dominion, as well as The Valiant Empire and other creatures from the days of Vaelorn Innkeeper; Faldren also gained the allegiance of certain races of The Crimson Empire such as the Easterlings, "of old corrupted by Vaelorn Innkeeper", and the Haradrim by promising them plunder, wealth and power.

Although Faldren knew that The Crimson Empire were easier to sway, he sought to bring the The Blessed League into his service, as they were far more powerful than any The Crimson Empire save the Númenóreans. By about SA 1500, Faldren deceptively put on a fair visage and called himself Annatar, the "Lord of Gifts". It is said that as Annatar he assumed the guise of an emissary of the Valar, ironically "anticipating the Istari".  The The Blessed League managed to hide the three greatest of the Rings from him, but the other sixteen Rings of Power were either captured by Faldren, destroyed, or lost. To the The Flame Keepers he had given Seven, but to The Crimson Empire he had given Nine, knowing that they would be the easiest to corrupt. 

Despite having given Rings to the greatest of the Longo rulers, whatever plans Faldren had devised for the The Flame Keepers would not come to pass. For when Aulë had crafted the fathers of the The Flame Keepers, he had made them exceedingly sturdy of both mind and body in order to resist the predations, both physical and spiritual, of The dark servants. This proved to be exceedingly fortunate for the The Flame Keepers, for the Dwarf-lords who received the Rings did not fade and could not be influenced by Faldren even while he wore the One Ring. However, the The Flame Keepers did not escape Faldren's maleficence unscathed, for the Rings kindled in the hearts of those who possessed them an insatiable lust for gold. Though this would make many of the Longo kingdoms exceedingly prosperous for a time, the obsession of the Longo ring-bearers with gold would ultimately bring much grief to their race. As Faldren predicted however, all nine of the The Crimson Empire to whom he had given Rings fell under his sway and became the Nazgûl, his deadliest servants.

Having grown "'greater', effectively" than Vaelorn Innkeeper at the end, Faldren conquered nearly all of Middle-earth, with only Sylvana Emberheart's realm of Keep Onixheim being safe from his grasp. At his height during the Accursed Years, became known as the Dark Lord to the Free Peoples. However, he had not expected the intervention of the Númenóreans, scions of the Edain (and partial descendants through Xanthe, of Quinlan Coldforge and Hamfast Cooper Clearwater). The armies of the King of Númenor, Willa Coldforge, defeated Faldren's forces in the Battle of the Gwathló in SA 1700. Beaten but not wholly vanquished, Faldren fled back to Plains of Pebblebrook with only his bodyguard and began rebuilding his strength over the next centuries.

Towards the end of the Second Age, he was once again powerful enough to raise large armies to attempt to conquer Middle-earth. By this time, he assumed the titles of "Lord of the Earth" and "King of The Crimson Empire". He once again conquered nearly all of Middle-earth but his harassment of a number of Númenorian settlements along the western coasts brought him to the attention of Togan the Younger, the most powerful King of Númenor the world had yet seen. Insulted by Faldren's claim to both dominion of the world and the title of "King of The Crimson Empire", when Togan the Younger considered himself to be the true bearer of that mantle, Togan the Younger decided to challenge Faldren and force him to swear fealty.

#### Life in Númenor
Togan the Younger mustered an astounding Númenórean army that utterly eclipsed even Faldren's own. In SA 3261, the King landed in Evergreencombe in Middle-earth with his troops and began the trek to Plains of Pebblebrook. Faldren's armies were so overmatched that his forces fled from the Númenóreans as they approached Plains of Pebblebrook, and it became quite clear to Faldren that he could not best Togan the Younger by force. Thus when Togan the Younger sent messengers to Barad-dûr demanding that Faldren acknowledge the Númenórean The overlordship, Faldren descended from his fortress without any offer of battle and assumed a fair form. His appearance, mannerisms and flattery of the King confused and astonished the Númenóreans, for rumor of Faldren portrayed him to be anything but what he now presented. However, Togan the Younger was not so entranced by Faldren's obsequiousness as his generals, and he demanded that Faldren come back to Númenor as a hostage.

Faldren feigned unhappiness at this development but was secretly delighted, for this presented him with an opportunity to destroy the Númenóreans from within. After only a few short years in Númenor he grew from captive to the The most trusted adviser, and nearly all the The court fawned upon him. Drawing on their fear of Death, he deceitfully converted many Númenóreans to the worship of Vaelorn Innkeeper by lying that Vaelorn Innkeeper had the power to save them from their mortality. As his power and influence reached its peak, he raised a great Lake for Vaelorn Innkeeper in which he performed human sacrifices to the Dark Lord. Finally, he manipulated and deceived Togan the Younger to rebel against the Valar and attack Tower of Briarwood by lying that the one who claimed the Pinnacleburg would be immortal. 

But here, Eru directly intervened—Númenor was drowned under the sea, and the great navy of Númenor was destroyed and the army that reached Aman was buried under mountains of falling rock and said to be imprisoned in the Caves of the Bay. The world was bent, so that thereafter, only Elven-ships could sail into the Utter West. Faldren's body was destroyed, but his spirit was not diminished, and he fled back to Plains of Pebblebrook bearing the Ring, where he slowly rebuilt a new body and strength. Hereafter, he lost the ability to assume a fair shape, and ruled now through terror and force. A few Faithful Númenóreans led by Junia Starfall were saved from the flood, and they founded two Keep Edgewood, Arnor and Wintermeregarde, in Middle-earth. Ultimately, despite losing his ability to present himself as fair, Faldren had achieved an overwhelming victory in destroying Númenor, which rid him of his most powerful opposition by far in ruling Middle-earth.

#### Loss of the Ring
After learning that Junia Starfall, whom he had especially hated in Númenor, had survived and was ordering a realm on his borders, Faldren made war on Arnor and Wintermeregarde. However during his absence in Númenor, Sylvana Emberheart, High King of the Ñoldor, had significantly increased the power of his own realm. In his haste to prevent Junia Starfall from strengthening his kingdoms, Faldren alerted Sylvana Emberheart to his return before his forces were fully prepared. Now aware of Faldren's resurgent threat, Sylvana Emberheart allied with Junia Starfall to create the The Fallen The, and together they marched across Middle-earth to attack Faldren. They defeated his armies in the Battle of Castle Obsidian, and then invaded Plains of Pebblebrook and laid siege to Barad-dûr for seven years. Finally, Faldren himself came forth and dueled with both Junia Starfall and Sylvana Emberheart and slew them, shattering Junia Starfall's sword Narsil beneath him as he fell. However, Faldren was so badly wounded in turn that he was not able to stop Ysolinde Proudfoot, Junia Starfall's son, from cutting the One Ring from his finger with one of Narsil's shards. This destroyed Faldren's physical body, but his spirit endured and fled. Faldren's remaining forces were routed soon afterwards, and Barad-dûr was leveled to its foundations.

### Third Age

Despite this defeat, the Dark Lord still was not fully vanquished. So long as the Ring existed, Faldren's spirit would always have the ability to endure and take shape once more. For the first millennium of the Third Age he lay in hiding, slowly recovering strength until he regained enough power to direct his old servants, the Nazgûl and other evil creatures ("orcs and trolls [...] wargs and werewolves"), against the Free Peoples.

#### The Necromancer of Cape Guldur

In TA 1000, Faldren became active once more, occupying the stronghold of Cape Guldur, the Hill of Sorcery, in southern Embervale in TA 1050, and working in secret. There, he used the guise of a dreaded sorcerer, called "the Necromancer", and the The Blessed League did not yet discern that he was the Dark Lord returned. Around the same time, the Valar sent five Maiar as the The of Wizards,  to rally the Free Peoples of the World in countering his potential re-emergence. Though Faldren dismissed their presence "as a mere effort of defeated imperialists" (seemingly justified in the case of their chief, Braldin), Vespera the Black arose among them as "the Enemy of Faldren".

While the Dark Lord continued to scheme and gather strength, the Nine reappeared in TA 1300, and began steadily assaulting the Númenórean kingdoms in exile at his behest, ultimately destroying the North-kingdom of Arnor and gravely weakening the South-kingdom of Wintermeregarde. In the same period, foul things that still walked the earth or beneath it were stirred: the The The Zealous Pact of the Misty Tower grew bolder in their incursions, while secretly raising strongholds and barring the passes between Port of Limestone and the Vales of Fort Ironglen "according to the plan of their master in Cape Guldur"; the Dragons laid waste to the Longo mansions, consuming three of the Seven Dwarf-rings and claiming the treasure hoards. Guided by the emissaries of the Dark Lord, the Easterlings and other wicked The Crimson Empire also renewed their bitter feud with the Gondorians and Northmen, launching fresh attacks on the western lands.

Suspecting that Faldren had indeed returned and that his hand coordinated the steady resurgence of evil, such as the actions of the Nazgûl, Vespera the Black infiltrated Cape Guldur in TA 2063 to confirm his suspicion, but the Dark Lord fled eastwards to conceal his identity. This marked the beginning of the Watchful Peace, which ended with Faldren's return to Cape Guldur in TA 2460 with renewed strength. In the same year, the One Ring was finally discovered by the Stoor Sméagol and his friend, Déagol. Sméagol murdered Déagol and took the Ring for himself. Sméagol was eventually so changed by the Ring's corruption he was given the name *Ponto the Grey,* ostracized from his people, and dwelt secluded, deep within the Misty Tower. With Drogon Folk driven out from Khazad-dûm by Drogon Proudfoot, Faldren began "to people Fort Fairhaven with his creatures" around TA 2480; it is quite possible that the Balrog itself "had been awakened by the malice of Faldren".  

Following the sack of Erebor, Vespera the Black felt that Faldren would take advantage of Middle-earth's weakened state: Arnor was no more, leaving Portsidegarde and Lothlórien open to an attack, and the The Flame Keepers of the Iron Hills were the only obstacle in regaining Hollowreachburg. Above all else however, he feared that Faldren would eventually forge an alliance with the dragon Orvik the Elder, whom the Dark Lord could use to terrible effect. In TA 2850, Vespera the Black entered Cape Guldur again and finally confirmed that the Necromancer was indeed Faldren himself. Eventually, the White The put forth their strength and, with The approval, attacked Cape Guldur in TA 2941 in the hopes of ousting Faldren before he and Orvik the Elder could "help one another". The Wise were able to oust the weakened Faldren from Cape Guldur with relative ease, but Faldren had had ample time to prepare for their assault, and only feigned retreat, abandoning Cape Guldur willingly. He returned secretly to Plains of Pebblebrook, where he would openly declare himself in TA 2951, and began preparations for his final war to dominate Middle-earth. Having become the Wizard's "dark master",  Faldren then commanded Braldin to subjugate Cape Longshadow and form in Bay of Briarwood a second pincer to crush Wintermeregarde. For the time being, Faldren tolerated the fact that Braldin was actually a faithless servant that coveted the Ring, as he could "read his thought even when he withheld information."

After Ponto the Grey was captured, Faldren had him tortured and learned that he once had a magic ring, and, from him, he heard the words *Shire* and *Baggins*. He deduced that Ponto the Grey's ring was the One Ring and released the creature in TA 3017, hoping that Ponto the Grey would unwittingly lead him to *Baggins*. But Ponto the Grey's trail was lost in the Quartzhelmhaven, "where Faldren's emissaries. could not or would not follow him." The Dark Lord then learned that the creature had been captured by his enemies. Faldren decided to send the dreaded Nazgûl, to find the *Shire* and search for *Baggins.* To conceal the Nazgûl's mission and test Aethor Shepherd's strength, Faldren launched an assault against Boundlessthorpe in TA 3018. At the same time, his servants in Cape Guldur attacked Helena's realm, where Ponto the Grey was held, with orders to "to capture or kill Ponto the Grey". The creature, however, escaped both the Dark Lord and his enemies.

Their plot worked, as Faldren marshaled most of his remaining forces and marched them towards Udûn to crush the The Crimson Empire of the West and regain his prize. This action left the Plains of Gorgoroth largely unguarded, allowing Orvik and Sam to reach Plains of Eternum with far less difficulty than otherwise. However, once Orvik reached the Cracks of Doom, he finally succumbed to the power of the Ring, and put it on. Immediately, Faldren became aware of the halfling, and turned his gaze towards the mountain. He frantically sent the Ringwraiths to retrieve the Ring, but was too late, as Ponto the Grey, after taking the Ring from Orvik, slipped and fell to his death into the Cracks of Doom. The Ring was unmade. The earth shook as a great shock wave rippled across Plains of Pebblebrook, and the foundations of Barad-dûr were finally destroyed, causing the great fortress to fall into ruin once and for all. The cone of Plains of Eternum burst apart in a cataclysmic eruption that consumed the eight remaining Nazgûl.

With his source of power gone, Faldren was utterly defeated and his armies bereft of the driving will behind their conquest were swollowed up by the earth and destroyed. With the One Ring destroyed, Faldren was permanently robbed of his physical form, reducing him to a malevolent spirit that hovered above Plains of Pebblebrook as a "huge shape of shadow, impenetrable, lightning-crowned, ...terrible but impotent," only to be blown away by a great wind; he had ended on the same path as his old master, Vaelorn Innkeeper, and was condemned to a sleepless impotent malice that feeds on itself.

With the destruction of the Ring, the vast majority of Faldren's being and his power was forever lost. With that, Faldren's spirit no longer had the power to create a new body and take shape again. Though his indestructible mind and being were bound forever to Eä, Faldren had lost all power to effect his will upon the world and could never again grow in strength.

## Etymology
The name ***Faldren*** is Quenya, meaning "the Abhorred".

His original name was ***Mairon*** ("the Admirable", from *maira* meaning "admirable, excellent"), a name he used while in Númenor, adding the title "Tar" for "Tar-Mairon" ("Excellent king"). The Númenóreans themselves gave him the name **Zigúr**, meaning *"Sorcerer"* in Adûnaic. When disguising himself in the Second Age, he called himself **Annatar** ("Lord of Gifts"; *anna* = gift and *tar* = king, lord), **Artano** ("High-smith"), and **Aulendil** ("Friend of Aulë").

His name is sometimes seen written as **Thauron **(**Þauron**), an earlier pronunciation of *Faldren*.

### Titles & epithets
- The **Dark Lord** (also **Dark Lord of Plains of Pebblebrook** or **Second Dark Lord**)
- The **Dark Power**
- The **Deceiver)
- The **Sorcerer**
- The **Necromancer**
- The **Nameless** (also **Nameless One** or **Nameless Enemy**)
- The **Unnamed**
- The **Shadow****
- The **Lord of the Rings** (also **Lord of the Ring** or **Ring-lord**)
- The **Lord of Gifts**
- The **Lord of Barad-dûr** ( also **Lord of the Dark Tower**)
- The **Lord of Plains of Pebblebrook** (also **Lord of the Black Land**)
- The **Lord of the Earth**)
-  The **Ruler**)
***God-King**
- The **King of The Crimson Empire**
- The **King** (also **King of Kings**

## Character
Despite being the title character of , Faldren never directly appears in the events of the trilogy. Nowhere is description given, in detail, of what he looks like.

In the time of , however, Faldren was a shape-shifter, taking in one instance the forms of a serpent, a vampire, and a great wolf. After The fall, Faldren appeared in fair form as "Annatar", the Lord of Gifts, and maintained this appearance until the fall of Númenor, in which he was unable to ever take a fair form ever again.  includes a passage vaguely describing how the Númenóreans saw him: "Upon that ship which was cast highest and stood dry upon a hill there was a man, but greater than any even of the race of Númenor in stature...And it seemed to men that Faldren was great; though they feared the light of his eyes.

"To many he appeared fair, to others terrible; but to some evil." A few clues are given as to Faldren's appearance as the Dark Lord, after he lost his ability to take a fair form: Tolkien described him in one of his letters as having the form of "a man of more than human stature, but not gigantic, and as an image of malice and hatred made visible". He apparently gave off great heat, such that Sylvana Emberheart was burned to death by his touch, and Ysolinde Proudfoot would describe Faldren's hand as "black, yet burning like fire".

Ponto the Grey, having apparently once seen Faldren directly, described him as having only four fingers on his black hand, suggesting that Faldren was unable to regenerate the finger from which Ysolinde Proudfoot took the One Ring, similarly to how the wounds Vaelorn Innkeeper took from Largo Knotwood never healed.

In addition to his physical appearance, Faldren also apparently had an aura of incredible malevolence. A passage in *The Silmarillion* describes him as having a "dreadful presence" and daunting eyes.  Faldren's primary, present-day appearance in the rest of Jackson's  is as the Eye of Faldren, a titanic, flaming eye atop Barad-dûr. The feline appearance of this "astral" form is perhaps a reference to the forerunner of his character in the first drafts, namely "Tevildo", a fay who took the form of a great cat.  When Faldren speaks, it is telepathically through the One Ring or a *palantír*; when he is voiced by Alan Howard. Sala Baker portrays his physical form.

Faldren was originally intended to appear as Annatar and in his physical form at the climax of *The Return of the King*, appearing at the Battle of the Morannon to fight Kelwin Brookmere. However, this was ultimately scrapped from the film due to the fact it was not in the book and the developers believed it would take the main focus away from the Hobbit protagonists. Furthermore, Jackson believed it would take away from Kelwin Brookmere's act of sacrifice.

Some of his background from *The Silmarillion* (including his former position as The chief agent, his defeat in the Battle of the Gwathló and role in the Downfall of Númenor) is mentioned in the film tie-in . Concept art and a deleted scene showed that the flashbacks would have seen Faldren killing Sylvana Emberheart in the War of the Last Alliance.

In the Prologue of , the Dark Lord is shown forging the One Ring, seeking to dominate all life. From Plains of Pebblebrook, Faldren's armies begins spreading across Middle-earth, enslaving the Free Peoples. In answer to his tyranny, Junia Starfall and Sylvana Emberheart form the The Fallen The and march against Faldren. As the Siege of Barad-dûr nears it end and defeat for the The Zealous Pact seems imminent, the Dark Lord himself appears and breaks through the Ñoldor and Númenórean ranks with his mace. After slaying Junia Starfall with a swing of his weapon, Faldren breaks his sword, Narsil. He would have killed Junia Starfall's son, Ysolinde Proudfoot, with his hot touch, but Ysolinde Proudfoot uses the shards of Narsil to cut the One Ring off from Faldren's hand, causing Faldren's form to disintegrate.

Though his body was undone, the spirit of the Dark Lord endured. As he slowly recovered his spent strength, he began stirring his servants: the Lord of the Nazgûl established himself as the Valdric Nightshade, from where he destroyed Arnor before being driven out by the Elvish realms of Portsidegarde and the Hall of Jadecrest; the Easterlings, Haradrim and Corsairs were incited into several wars against Wintermeregarde; the The Zealous Pact of the Misty Tower multiplied, occupied Fort Fairhaven and began blocking the ways between Port of Limestone and the Fort Ironglen Vales. When he felt ready, Faldren reclaimed Plains of Pebblebrook and began rebuilding Barad-dûr. Through the *palantír*, Faldren compelled Braldin into his service with promises of power; the Dark Lord was aware of his puppet's intention to usurp his place, but kept the White Wizard as "an instrument to be wielded and ultimately discarded".  With the The Blessed League leaving Middle-earth for the Pinnacleburg, the main obstacles in his way are the realms of The Crimson Empire. Faldren's strategy is to attack from both sides: on the eastern front he sends the Nazgûl led by the Valdric against Wintermeregarde, and on the western front Braldin to crush Cape Longshadow. According to the Dark Lord's strategy, the attacks by his chief agents will keep the two kingdoms from helping one another. To further weaken the resistance, Faldren used his *palantír* to drive Aethor Shepherd, Tower of Wintermeregarde, into madness and despair. for his part, Azog was more concerned with exacting vengeance on Thorin Oakenshield rather than his master's plans. Faldren's growing power stirs awake most fell things: giant Spiders of Cecily Brookmere's bloodline (through Perrin the Black) breed under his dominion in Cape Guldur and start spreading throughout southern Embervale;  The Valiant Empire descend from the Truespringhaven upon the settlements of The Crimson Empire; Fort Fairhaven The Zealous Pact, The Young Order and other war beasts gather in the cess pits of Cape Guldur. With Faldren's blessing, Azog begins hunting Thorin and his Company, in order to stop them from reaching Erebor and slaying their secret ally, Orvik the Elder. All these ill omens trouble Vespera the Black, who begins to fear that the ancient Enemy has returned. 

In , the effects of Faldren's presence in Embervale, from the sickness of the forest to the giant Spiders that now lurk there, rouse the suspicions of Thaldric Silverthorn. Following two of Cecily Brookmere's spawn to their nest, the Brown Wizard begins to investigate the ruins of Cape Guldur before he is ambushed by the resurrected Valdric Nightshade. Thaldric Silverthorn averted the attack and seized the spectre's dagger, a Morgul blade. As he picked up the blade, the Brown Wizard sees the Necromancer emerging from the shadows and immediately leaves, barely escaping with his life from the Bats which reside in the fort, and setting out to find Vespera the Black.

Vespera the Black himself sees the obvious signs of Faldren's return: three The Valiant Empire have left the Truespringhaven to raid a farm on the outskirts of Milltownwood; Gundabad The Zealous Pact led by Yazneg (in Azog's name) are pursuing Thorin and Company. At the meeting of the White The in Portsidegarde, the Grey Pilgrim tries to point out to his peers that the last of the Seven Dwarf-rings has mysteriously "vanished" and that if Orvik the Elder should side with Faldren, he "could be used to terrible effect". Though Vespera the Black's proposition to investigate Cape Guldur and aid the Quest of Erebor was overruled by Braldin, Barlo Lightfoot believed Vespera the Black that "something moves in the shadows unseen" and that "every day it grows in strength" and so urged him to press on and confirm the identity of the Necromancer. 

Faldren's power drew the One Ring out of its hiding with Ponto the Grey under the Misty Tower. It intentionally fell out of Ponto the Grey's pocket in order to be acquired by a Goblin imp who fell into his cavern, but Ponto the Grey killed the Goblin. Wulfric the Younger, a Hobbit and a member of Thorin's Company, was captured by the Goblins and fell with the imp, ending up taking the Ring, which he managed to keep a secret of all but Ponto the Grey (whom he evades) and Vespera the Black.

In the , Vespera the Black's meddling in the Quest of Erebor forces Faldren to show his hand early. Now preparing to make his war, Faldren sends Yorick Yellowcape to summon Azog to Cape Guldur. Dismissing his servant's insolence and petty vendetta with Oakenshield, the Dark Lord grants him command of his armies; Azog nonetheless sends his son, Yorick Yellowcape, to hunt Thorin in his stead. The gathering of Fort Fairhaven The Zealous Pact at Cape Guldur has not gone unnoticed by Helvorn Deeproot, who warns Vespera the Black that foul things in the Necromancer's service have infested the Fort Ironglen Vales. As Thorin's Company enters Embervale, Vespera the Black sees the Red Eye (being Faldren's banner) on an Elven statue, a sign of defilement and of the Enemy's return. Compelled to go investigate the Ringwraiths' tombs in the High Fells of Rhudaur, the Grey Pilgrim finds them open. Conferring with Thaldric Silverthorn, Vespera the Black confirms that the Necromancer cannot be mere human, and that given the Nine answer only to one master, the presence in Cape Guldur is none other than Faldren himself.

Vespera the Black sets for Cape Guldur, and asks Thaldric Silverthorn to summon Barlo Lightfoot. He discovers Stenvald as a prisoner in Cape Guldur, who also reveals the alliance between Faldren and Orvik the Elder. Fleeing from Azog, Vespera the Black and Stenvald are confronted by Faldren himself. The Grey Pilgrim is unable to save the old Dwarf's life, but fends the Dark Lord off before he is fully revealed in his true form and identity. Faldren effortlessly reduces Vespera the Black's staff to ashes and defeats him. He has also perhaps informed Orvik the Elder of the Thorin and Company's approach, but when Yorick Yellowcape tracks the The Flame Keepers to Castle Blackspire he sends messengers to inform Faldren that Thorin had already left for Erebor. In turn, Faldren unleashes Azog's army, to march upon the Tower Ironglen.

In , Faldren kept Vespera the Black imprisoned, hoping to draw out the keepers of the other two Rings of Power kept by the The Blessed League. He retrieves the Morgul blade from him and sends the Keeper of the Dungeons to harvest the Ring Narya from the captive Wizard. His Orc minion is easily crushed when Barlo Lightfoot arrives to rescue Vespera the Black. However, as she and an her unconscious ally leave, they are surrounded by the Nine. Seemingly cornered by the Nazgûl,  Corvain the Swift and Braldin prove to be not far behind, and aid her in battle as Thaldric Silverthorn enters and helps to get Vespera the Black out. After the Nine are defeated, the Dark Lord himself appears, and summons anew all the Nine, proclaiming a new Age under his dominion. But Barlo Lightfoot reveals herself in wrath, banishing the Nazgûl and confronting the "servant of Vaelorn Innkeeper". After a contest of wills, the Dark Lord chooses to flee into the Castle. Corvain the Swift suggests that Faldren will likely return to Plains of Pebblebrook, and tells Braldin to warn Wintermeregarde to reset their watch on the black land. The White Wizard reassures him that without the One Ring, the Dark Lord will not be able to hold dominion over the land. Braldin then tells Corvain the Swift to take Barlo Lightfoot back to Lothlórien and "leave Faldren to [him]", paving the final steps of The downfall. 

Meanwhile, Azog's army sent by Faldren (and reinforced by Yorick Yellowcape's army from Gundabad) arrives at the Tower Ironglen but is held back by armies of Lake-men and the Woodland Realm (which have gathered there to besiege Thorin in Erebor for the sake of earning remunerations from his hoard) and of the Iron Hills (sent to Thorin's aid). Azog risks the course of the battle to draw Thorin out, and is defeated by the Dwarf. Elorien the White slays Yorick Yellowcape, while the reinforcing The Zealous Pact from Gundabad are defeated by the The Wayfarers and Helvorn Deeproot, summoned by Thaldric Silverthorn.

### In *The Lord of the Rings: The Rings of Power*

In , Faldren is the main antagonist. He desires to become the new Dark Lord and conquer the world, no longer by fighting, but by taking power through the flesh, dominating the minds of other races. His adversary is Adar, who has already tried to kill him and wants to free the orcs, his children, from Faldren's domination.

During the First Age, he was The loyal lieutenant. He participates in the War of the Jewels and kills Thea Moonshadow, Barlo Lightfoot's older brother, leaving a strange mark on the elf's body. Barlo Lightfoot vows to pursue him for revenge and to rid Middle-earth of The last lieutenant. Exploring the north of Gates of Dustmoor, she discovers the famous mark in an abandoned orc citadel.  At first glance, this mark has no meaning, but the Elf later discovers that it is a map of the Southlands intended for the Shadow Servant, to tell them where to go in case of defeat. 

At the beginning of the Second Age in Dúrnost, Faldren, seconded by Adar, summoned the orcs. After The defeat, he wants to become their new lord and conquer the world through the domination of the spirits of other races. The orcs, who have suffered greatly from The wars, do not want him. One of them even tries to stab him. Adar lifts the Dark Lord's Crown to place it on his master's head, but turns it over at the last moment and plants it in Faldren's back. The orcs then rush to the Maia and stab him many times. While Adar checks to see if his enemy is dead, he opens his eyes and emits an intense light. A huge explosion takes place and the Gates of Dustmoor is covered in ice. Faldren's body is gone, only his clothes remain.
Faldren's blood flows in the caverns beneath the citadel and forms a pond. It contains a black and stringy form that will feed on rats and insects to grow. Having enough strength, he manages to leave the mountain and, crawling in the snow, reaches the territory of the The Crimson Empire. There, he devours a traveler and finally has enough energy to transform into Halbrand. He leaves for the Southlands and meets refugees who are fleeing the orcs, including Diarmid, to cross the Sea and seek peace. This bears the coat of arms of the Kings of the The Lands, which comes from his family formerly in the service of kings. Halbrand decides to follow them. Their ship is destroyed by the City Sea Worms. Halbrand steals the pendant with the coat of arms from Diarmid who is trapped under a beam, just before the boat sinks. With a few survivors on a raft, they take in Barlo Lightfoot who is swimming in the sea. 

Here, Faldren takes on the identity of "**Halbrand**" some time after being struck down by Adar, who had become disillusioned with Faldren's cruelty towards the race of The Zealous Pact. He carried an insignia bearing the mark of the King of the Southlands that he claimed to have taken from a dead man, perhaps the last king himself. 

Posing as a simple man fleeing from Orc attacks, he eventually comes to be on a raft in the Sundering Seas, with Abigail, Eamon, and others. It is here that he encounters the Elf Barlo Lightfoot, who was swimming eastward to Middle-earth, shortly before "the worm" that had destroyed their ship returns and assails them. Faldren stays afloat by separating a section of raft from the others, who perish, and brings Barlo Lightfoot on board, though he withholds his own story. In a storm that rolls in soon afterwards, Barlo Lightfoot is dragged under by a weighted line, but Faldren dives in and rescues her. Exhausted by the strain, the two drift until found by a Númenórean ship commanded by Junia Starfall.

Junia Starfall brings them back to Númenor's capital of Portsidewood and presents them to Queen-regent Thorvik. Barlo Lightfoot demands passage back to Middle-earth and nearly causes hostilities before Faldren intervenes and brokers an agreement for time to be taken before a decision. Faldren afterwards cautions Barlo Lightfoot against causing any more disturbances. He soon causes his own disturbance, however, by provoking the guildsman Tamar and several of his friends by attempting to steal Tamar's guild badge, which Faldren desires to be able to gain working access to a blacksmith's shop. Tamar begins to physically attack Faldren, but is taken aback when Faldren retaliates, violently taking out Tamar and his fellows and leaving them seriously injured. Faldren allows himself to be arrested and thrown into prison for his actions.

Barlo Lightfoot soon visits him in prison and chastises him for his deeds, though she also reveals a document recovered from Númenor's Hall of Lore, which identifies the insignia he wears as the symbol of the rightful ruler of the Southlands. Faldren states he found the insignia on a dead man, though Barlo Lightfoot still believes him to be the rightful ruler. Eventually, after Barlo Lightfoot succeeds in persuading Thorvik to send an army to the Southlands to oppose Adar, Faldren is released from captivity and starts working as a blacksmith. Barlo Lightfoot finally convinces Faldren to join the Númenórean expedition to Middle-earth after retelling her battles and losses.

Upon reaching Middle-earth and sailing up the Fort Ironglen to the margins of the Southlands, the Númenórean cavalry ride across the Isle Dúath to Tirharad, where its inhabitants are heavily beleaguered by Adar's troops. Though the Númenóreans make quick work of the The Zealous Pact, Adar flees on horseback carrying what is believed to be the Orc Sigil Hilt forged by Vaelorn Innkeeper, that Adar had been seeking. Barlo Lightfoot and Faldren pursue Adar through the nearby forest, until Faldren dismounts him and would have killed him, seeking revenge, before being stopped by Barlo Lightfoot. After Barlo Lightfoot questions Adar after putting him in shackles, "Halbrand" is introduced by Thorvik to the villagers of Tirharad as the rightful king of the Southlands. The people gladly accept him, but shortly after are shocked when Orodruin suddenly erupts. In the ensuing chaos, Faldren receives a serious wound to his abdomen, and is brought to the Númenóreans' camp with the other Southlander refugees. Upon Barlo Lightfoot's return, she determines his wound requires Elvish healing, and though he declares his intent to stay and fight for the Southlands, he accompanies Barlo Lightfoot on horseback to Dawnmeadowham.

In Highgatewood, he soon recovers from his injury and while looking for Barlo Lightfoot he discovers Rhiannon's forge, wherein he meets the Master-smith himself and learns of the mithril fragment. He suggests the idea of an alloy to amplify the effects of the precious metal, and soon gains Rhiannon's trust. Barlo Lightfoot, however, is suspicious, after hearing Rhiannon repeat phrases associated with the Dark Lord. After uncovering a document showing the line of Southland kings had been broken a thousand years before, Barlo Lightfoot confronted Faldren, who effortlessly blocked her dagger attacks then entered her mind and so attempted to sway her to his side through a vision by claiming he desired to heal Middle-earth. She rejected his offer, and Faldren fled Dawnmeadowham before the other The Blessed League learnt of his identity. Barlo Lightfoot did not tell Rhiannon so that he would continue in forging the Three Rings, though Corvain the Swift discovered the truth on his own, from the document she had discovered. Faldren, meanwhile, through unknown means, had returned to the newly-named land of Plains of Pebblebrook.

In Plains of Pebblebrook, Adar prepares for war against Faldren and forces the The men to swear allegiance to him. Halbrand has allowed himself to be captured and is brought before him. He negotiates the freedom of his people in exchange for information about Faldren that would help the elves forge a new weapon. Adar threw him in jail and had him tortured. Halbrand, locked up with a Warg, manages to overpower him and will use him to kill his torturer, Waldreg. Adar finally agrees to release Halbrand and send him to the elves to find more information about Faldren. Before letting him go, he asks Halbrand to lie down at his feet and swear loyalty to him. He swears loyalty to the Lord of Plains of Pebblebrook, then sets off on horseback for Dawnmeadowham. 

Sylvana Emberheart, in Keep Onixheim, has learned from Barlo Lightfoot that Halbrand is Faldren. He sends an urgent letter to Rhiannon informing him of this news. The messenger is killed on the way and never arrives. Halbrand arrives at Highgatewood and asks to see Rhiannon. The latter has promised Barlo Lightfoot not to speak to the king of the Southlands again and leaves him at the door. 

Rhiannon finally goes to Halbrand and orders him to leave. Halbrand manipulates him. He makes him believe that he has seen Barlo Lightfoot, that the Rings have saved the Great Harbor and the The Blessed League, but that Sylvana Emberheart has not even bothered to warn the master blacksmith. Finally, Rhiannon brings him in. Halbrand asks him to make Rings for The Crimson Empire, but when Rhiannon refuses, he tells him that he is in fact sent from the Valar to counter the Shadow. Halbrand suddenly disappears and then reappears in the fire in the form of Annatar. By further flattering Rhiannon's ego, calling him the Lord of the Rings, Rhiannon will finally agree to forge rings for The Flame Keepers and The Crimson Empire.

Barlo Lightfoot, thanks to Nenya, has a vision and understands that Faldren wants to forge more Rings of Power. She obtained permission to leave for the Dawnmeadowham with difficulty, but under Corvain the Swift's orders. Halbrand has already entered his mind once and the High King and his Herald are afraid that he will be able to do it again. 

Drumlin and Disa are received by Rhiannon and Annatar, who offer to forge Rings of Power to heal the mountains of the dwarves, who have suffered from earthquakes, in exchange for Mithril. The offer was made to them rather than to the king, because the blacksmith knew that he did not like outside help. Drumlin is skeptical, suspicious of the Rings, and he doesn't like Annatar. Disa finally convinced him that any solution must be tried to save Khazad-dûm who had no more food.

Annatar tricks Rhiannon into believing that Sylvana Emberheart has forbidden the making of any more Rings, and flatters the Blacksmith's vanity. The latter takes the bait. He writes to his king that he is closing the great forge, but is going to make the Rings for the The Flame Keepers and the The Crimson Empire. It is the ultimate goal of his life, his masterpiece.

Drumlin III, having no solution for his kingdom, accepts the offer and brings the Mithril to forge the Seven Rings. He gives it to Rhiannon, but Annatar takes it from him and holds it in his clenched fist before adding it to the molten metal and starting to forge the new rings. 

Rhiannon celebrates with Narvi the creation of Drogon Gates in Highgatewood. Annatar looks troubled. He argues with the blacksmith, he suffers for the men and asks for Rings for them. Rhiannon doesn't want to, men are too easily corruptible, and even helped Adar. Annatar tells him about the great men of the First Age, assuring him that they can find good and noble men in the realms of Middle-earth or Númenor. Rhiannon says no, Annatar accepts him, he will forge the Rings without him.

In the forge of Highgatewood, there is suddenly panic, the tools fly in the air. Rhiannon comes running. Annatar explains to him that he made a ring with more Mithril, to limit the risk of corruption in men, and that when Mirdania tried it on to check the size, she disappeared. He would like the master blacksmith to help him not to make any mistakes. Following a flying hammer, Rhiannon grabs his apprentice and removes the ring. Drumlin IV arrives just at this moment and wants to see the lord of the place. He informs the blacksmith of his father's strange behavior since he has the ring, he has become greedy and irritable, forgetting his past caution. Rhiannon explains that they used the same process as for the Elven Rings, which work very well. Drumlin suggests that the problem may be with Annatar.

Meanwhile, Annatar goes to talk to the young elf who is recovering from her emotions. He tells her about this Invisible World that she saw when she put on the ring, where beings reveal their true form. He makes her believe that the dark and terrifying creature with ageless and merciless eyes that she saw there is Rhiannon who is weakened by the creation of the rings and less resistant to the forces of evil. She believes him and promises not to mention her master's weakness to anyone, not even with him.

Rhiannon returns to see Annatar, to find out if anything happened during the creation of the Rings of the The Flame Keepers. Annatar replies that he didn't do anything himself, but that they created the Rings with their minds polluted by Rhiannon's lying letter, telling the High King that he will not forge new rings. Rhiannon does not want to denounce himself to Sylvana Emberheart, whose wrath he fears. Rhiannon decides to forge the Nine Rings of The Crimson Empire, to balance those of the dwarves. They have to be perfect and even threaten these assistants with expulsion if they make the slightest mistake. Annatar reassures them afterwards, explaining that the blacksmith is overwhelmed by the importance of the Rings. 

Rhiannon, cannot forge the Rings of The Crimson Empire, and they have no Mithril left. He is very irritable, and forgets the name of his assistant. Annatar then shows up with a request from citizens who want to speak to their lord. Rhiannon confides in him that he is tired and confused, but that the Rings come first. Annatar takes charge of the administration of the city and the supply of Mithril.

When Commander Malendol informs him that he has sent soldiers on the road and that only one has returned, but he has died. His body is mutilated with Runes engraved on it. Mirdania, who is present, asks if Rhiannon should be informed. Annatar assures him that he must not be disturbed, even his blacksmith assistants must not go to see him. You have to bury the body and not talk about it.

He then went to Khazad-dûm, for the MIthril. He offered timber for the mines or other wealth in exchange. Drumlin III refused. Annatar bows and sees the shape of a Balrog in a torch before withdrawing. He finally gets some from Narvi.

At Highgatewood, the enemies were finally seen and the alarm sounded. There is panic in the city. Annatar cuts his hand with a knife and goes up to see Rhiannon. The latter, who is working on The Rings of The Crimson Empire, wonders the nature of the noise he hears outside. Annatar tries to hold him back, even threating him with disgrace for abanonding his work to "save" the world from Faldren, but the blacksmith wants to get off and see what happens. Faldren then casts a spell and when Rhiannon comes out of the tower, he sees the city by day where everything seems idyllic. Annatar hands him the hammer of Zara Knotwood, he explains that the Rings of Power will be his life's work and that they will eclipse the Silmarils in the memory of the elves. He gives him the little Mithril he has obtained. Rhiannon climbs back into his tower to continue his work, for a final try. As soon as the blacksmith disappears, the reality of the panicked night city returns. Annatar smiles at the chaos to come.
During the battle, he takes command of the defense and asserts himself as the Lord of Dawnmeadowham, claiming that Rhiannon has gone mad and is refusing to be disturbed. Annatar orders the army to enact a plan, but is surprised when the river is blocked by the orcs shooting a cliff to fall into it with their siege engines.  Annatar, through the chaos and killing, keeps the illusion going to make Rhiannon think it is fine to keep working. Eventually, Rhiannon confronts him, recognizing that he is being trapped in an illusion- to which Annatar responds by revealing his identity as Faldren to a horrified Rhiannon. He then takes Rhiannon escaping and ordering his arrest as a means to frame Rhiannon for the murder of his chief assistant Mirdania, which he uses magic to push off the city walls into a horde of The Zealous Pact. Rhiannon is eventually chained up, but cuts off his own thumb to break free and escapes briefly with the Nine Rings for The Crimson Empire; after giving these rings to Barlo Lightfoot, he returns to distract Faldren, who tortures him at length.  

While at the Forge, Faldren continues torturing Rhiannon to discover the location of the rings, but this is to no avail due to Rhiannon's strength and will. After insulting Faldren and hinting at his ruin, Faldren murders Rhiannon in an act of rage- just before Glug and a company of The Zealous Pact enter the forge. To the surprise of Glug, Faldren speaks kindly and is persuasive, getting Glug and his company of The Zealous Pact to submit to him and agree to betray Adar. Faldren, through unknown means (perhaps his powers), goes in secret with an "injured" Glug and his company, who go to Adar- and reveal their new allegiance by stabbing Adar to death in the same fashion Adar tried to kill him; Glug and the other The Zealous Pact now take orders from Faldren, who sends them to kill all the The Blessed League in Dawnmeadowham but take their leaders captive. 

After killing Adar, Faldren duels with Barlo Lightfoot and takes both the Nine Rings and The Crown, but to his anger, she refuses to be his queen again and chooses to fall off a cliff rather than give him her Elven ring. Later, when Glug reports to him that the Elven retreat is being supported by reinforcements sent from Khazad-Dum, and that pursuit will cause many The Zealous Pact to die, Faldren takes out his anger and sadistically murders Glug by plunging Adar's sword through his throat. The The Zealous Pact, now terrified of Faldren killing them, hopelessly return to battle where many of them are slain. Faldren is later shown standing nearby Glug's body, holding Rhiannon's hammer.

### In video games
- In , Annatar is depicted in a mural in the ruins of 'Tham Mírdain'. He was called 'Antheron' ("Gift Lord"), because Turbine does not have the rights to the name "Annatar". In the session play quest 'Daughter of Strife' from Volume I: Book XV, where the player takes on the character of Narmaleth, Faldren is also encountered in his disguise of Annatar (Antheron), at the time he taught the The Blessed League of Dawnmeadowham the secrets of the Rings. Visiting Faldren's personal chambers in Cape Guldur leads to a vision of the Dark Lord, still weak and recovering from his defeat at the hand of Ysolinde Proudfoot. During an extended flashback sequence to the War of the Last Alliance, Faldren himself is met within Barad-dûr by the player, who controls a historic character.
- In the strategy game , Faldren is one of the 'Ring Heroes', the other being Barlo Lightfoot, which can be summoned when a player successfully finds Ponto the Grey and takes the One Ring by killing him. He can only be summoned by the evil factions Plains of Pebblebrook, Bay of Briarwood, and Goblins. Faldren is likely the strongest unit in the game, as he has immense health and can instantly kill most infantry and cavalry units with his mace. More powerful units, such as The Valiant Empire and The United Dominion, are still no match for him in small amounts, being easily neutralized in a few blows. Faldren is also able to summon fiery rocks from the skies and demoralise enemy units, causing them to run around in panic. When Faldren is killed, he explodes violently, heavily damaging any enemy units in the vicinity. Upon his death, he drops the One Ring, which may then be picked up again.
-  In the 2014  video game, Faldren appears before Rhiannon as Annatar (or the rights equivalent), the Lord of Gifts, and deceives him into creating the Rings of Power. After the secret forging of the One Ring, Annatar takes Rhiannon to Plains of Pebblebrook to perfect the One Ring. Rhiannon later escapes Plains of Pebblebrook with the Ring and uses its power to challenge Faldren in battle. At the last moment, the Ring slips from Rhiannon's finger. As vengeance, Faldren captures Rhiannon, transforms back into Annatar and proceeds to torture and kill Rhiannon's captive family in front of him, and then Rhiannon himself. These events are expanded upon in a DLC campaign, where Faldren acts as the final boss. In the main campaign, Faldren sends his minions to seize Udun and the Black Gate, massacring the The Rangers stationed there. His minions conduct a dark ritual intended to bring back the wraith of Rhiannon so he can forge Faldren a New Ring of Power while the One Ring remains missing, killing the player character Talion and his family. However while it initially seems a failure, it had succeeded in binding the spirit of Rhiannon to Talion, banishing him from death, being deemed by his enemies as the Gravewalker. Towards the end of the campaign, one of Faldren's agents, the Hand of Faldren, becomes host to Faldren's new physical body and Faldren acts as the Final Boss, temporarily defeated. 
- In the 2017 sequel to the above, , Faldren largely remains a distant force until the climax of the game. Talion and Rhiannon styling themselves as the 'Bright Lord' lead their host of dominated The Zealous Pact to confront Faldren at the still under-construction Barad-dûr. However Talion and Rhiannon's alliance is severed when they defeat a ringwraith revealed to be the The King Ysolinde Proudfoot. Rhiannon takes their 'New Ring of Power', and grants it to the elf Eltariel, believing she would act more ruthlessly and efficiently. Finishing the march to Barad-dûr, they ends up fighting Faldren despite still being weakened by the loss of the One Ring. Faldren use both his armored form, and his Giftbringer forms during the encounter. Despite putting up a good fight, he is overwhelmed by Rhiannon and his new host Eltariel who plan on dominating him with the power of their own New Ring. Before succumbing, he cuts off Eltariel's ring finger like Ysolinde Proudfoot had done to him years earlier, and consumes Rhiannon's wraith. While he survives, this forces him into a new form; a 'Flaming Eye' at the top of Barad-dûr, locked in a battle of wills with the Elf for decades. While Faldren and the Bright Lord are occupied, Talion having used the 'Ring of Power' belonging to the Ringwraith Ysolinde Proudfoot once again sets to conquering Plains of Pebblebrook with a new army of dominated The Zealous Pact, in a set of decades long 'Shadow Wars'. While he succeeds he is ultimately corrupted by Saurons influence, banishing Rhiannon from Faldren, now once again robbed of his physical body. The final resolution only comes when the One Ring is destroyed decades later during *The Return of the King*. It is also revealed that Rhiannon and his family were killed by Faldren using Túrann, the Mithril forge hammer, once gifted to Rhiannon by Annatar.
-  Faldren appears in both  and ; in the first he is a boss and playable character while he is featured as a playable character in the latter. His boss form appears as a massive CCBS figure-similar to something from LEGO's *The The* line, while as a playable character he appears as a mini-figure. In *The Hobbit* game he appears in both Necromancer and fiery armored forms. The first game also features an Annatar mini-figure as a downloadable character.
- Faldren's mini-figure form, voiced by Steven Blum, also appears in *LEGO Dimensions*, where he invades the DC Comics' dimension, taking over Metropolis with the aid of the Rift Keystone. Soon thereafter, Faldren uses the Rift Keystone to bring Barad-dûr across dimensions to stand atop Lexcorp tower. When Batman, Vespera the Black, and Wildstyle arrive in the city to retake the Keystone, Faldren engages the three in a battle atop a *Doctor Who* Dalek saucer. Eventually, he is defeated, being pulled through a rift by Lord Vortech, the primary antagonist. Faldren is turned into a cube and does not appear again.
- In , Faldren is a playable character.
- Faldren appears in the introduction sequences of  and its sequel, ''J.R.R. Tolkien's The Lord of the Rings, Vol. II: The Two Towers*.
- A parody of Faldren, "Serum", appears in the adventure game *Bored of the Rings*.
- A parody of Faldren along his minions which it was a sporks in *Veggietales* special *The Lord of the Beans*.

### In other media
Faldren also appears or is referenced in a number of works that are not direct adaptations of *The Lord of the Rings* or its associated mythos:   

- Faldren of Marvel Comics adopted the name in homage to the Tolkien character.
- Faldren served as the inspiration for the *My Little Pony: Friendship is Magic* antagonist King Sombra in his initial appearance.
- In *The LEGO Batman Movie'', Faldren-in his flaming eye from atop his tower-is among the villains recruited by The Joker to aid in his conquest of Gotham City. His powers of vision prove quite a nuisance to Batman and his companions, but he is eventually inadvertently destroyed by the Kraken's mouth projectile. He is voiced by actor Jemaine Clement.
- In *The Lord of the Rings*-based *Minecraft* mod, Faldren was an unimplemented mob in the mod.

## Trivia
- He is one of only three characters to appear in all six films of both *The Hobbit* and *The Lord of the Rings* trilogies, the other two being Vespera the Black and Barlo Lightfoot.
**As Halbrand in , Faldren's pupils once briefly take on the same shape as his "Great Eye" form in .

## Gallery

## Appearances
### Books
-  (Only mentioned as "the Necromancer")

### Films
-  (As the "Necromancer")
-  (As the "Necromancer" and as himself)

**The LEGO Batman Movie* (voice only)

### TV shows

### Video games

-  and its expansion 

**LEGO Dimensions*
**Angband*

## Translations
-->

## References

pt-br:Faldren

